# Introduction {#sec:ch3-sec1}

Numerical methods for computing the dynamic response of the ground and
soil-structures, such as embankments, bridges and pile foundations, and
tunnels, are an indispensable tool for designing and monitoring ground
structures. The Finite Element Method (FEM) has been undoubtedly
accepted as the most popular, reliable, and successful numerical tool
for simulating soil dynamics problems
[@Anandarajah1993; @Khoshnoudian2002; @Kimura2000; @Kuwano1991; @LiandUgai1998; @Murakami2010].
Further, environmental impact and safety assessments of the ground
vibrations generated by high-speed trains
[@Ditzel2001; @Krylov1996; @Takemiya2003] and road traffic
[@Chua1992; @Clemente1998; @Clouteau2001; @Maeda1998] close to the
residential areas, hospitals, and high-tech industries are of paramount
importance. FEM has also been extensively used for investigating the
level of vibrations and schemes to reduce them
[@Hung2001; @Ju2007; @Ju2009; @Ju2006; @Ju2004]. Moreover, in the field
of transportation engineering, nondestructive deflection testing, with
the Falling Weight Deflectometer (FWD), has become increasingly popular
for monitoring the structural health of flexible pavement systems over
time @Chai2014 [@Elbagalati2018; @Maina2000]. In FWD testing, the
recorded time histories of surface deflections are used to
back-calculate the moduli of pavement layers by employing
parameter-identification techniques [@Goktepe2006]. Recently, FEM has
been employed extensively to simulate FWD testing under realistic
conditions and to predict the response of pavement systems brought about
by impulsive loading [@Loizos2005; @Nazarian1995; @Picoux2009].

In the preceding discussion, the most extended approach for solving
elastodynamics problems was based on a semi-discretized FEM formulation.
In this approach, FEM is first applied to the spatial domain leading to
a system of ordinary differential equations (ODE) in the time domain.
Subsequently, direct time integration schemes, based on the finite
difference method, are employed to solve the resulting system of ODEs.
In general, the errors in the finite element simulations of
soil-dynamics problems are partially due to the space-time
discretization and to the uncertainties involved in the material
constitutive relationship and the material parameters. Numerical errors
can be reduced by adopting high-order accurate time solvers within FEM
framework. Unconditionally stable methods, such as the Newmark-beta
method [@Newmark1959], the HHT-$\alpha$ method [@Hilber1977], the
Houbolt method [@Houbolt1950], and the Wilson-$\theta$ method
[@Bathe1976], are the most often used dynamic solvers. However, these
methods are only second-order accurate. Furthermore, Dahlquist's theorem
says that a single-step unconditionally stable time-integration
algorithm can be at most second-order accurate [@Dahlquist1963].
High-order accurate time-integration schemes based on finite difference
schemes can be employed. However, these schemes are generally
conditionally stable and require very small time steps for stability
[@Hughes1983]. The requirement of small time steps increases the overall
computational cost of large-scale simulations. Therefore, there is still
a need for dynamic solvers which are high-order accurate and
unconditionally stable, such that large time steps can be used to reduce
the computational cost while maintaining the accuracy of the solutions.
The aim of this thesis is to devise such a scheme.

To achieve high-order accuracy combined with stability, an alternative
strategy called the Space-Time Finite Element Method (ST/FEM) was
proposed in the past; it is still being actively researched. The concept
of finite elements in the time domain was first exploited independently
in @Argyris1969 and @Fried1969 using Hamilton's principle.
Unfortunately, these formulations were found to be inconsistent, and
even inaccurate in some cases, due to the vanishing variation in the
displacement at the end points of the time interval. Soon after,
@Bailey1975 [@Bailey1980; @Bailey1982] and @Simkins1981 established that
instead of Hamilton's principle, Hamilton's law of varying action, HLVA,
should be used as the starting point for the time-finite element
formulations, as it includes the initial conditions implicitly. However,
for quite some time, researchers misinterpreted the so-called *trailing
terms* of HLVA, and believed that both the displacement field and the
velocity field should be continuous in time [@Borri1985b]. Due to this
misconception, many studies adopted Hermite cubic polynomials as the
lowest order of interpolation functions for the displacement field
[@Baruch1982; @Baruch1984; @Gellert1978; @Geradin1974; @Howard1978; @Riff1984; @Simkins1981; @Sorek1982].
Later, Borri and his colleagues [@Borri1986; @Borri1985a; @Borri1985b]
showed that the need to use Hermite polynomials can be avoided by
employing Hamilton's weak principle (HWP) in which approximating
functions should ensure the continuity of only the displacement field
(i.e., $C0$ continuity in time), and not that of any of its
time-derivatives. More recently, unconditionally stable time-finite
element formulations have been derived using the two-field form of HWP
instead of the primal form
[@Aharoni1992; @Borri1990; @Borri1991; @Borri1993; @Mello1990; @Ruge1996].
For a comprehensive overview and recent advances in the time-finite
element formulations based on Hamilton's law, readers are referred to
@Tamma2011.

Another approach towards development of the ST/FEM is by weighted
residual techniques, such as the continuous Galerkin method
[@Bajer1995; @Bajer1987], the discontinuous Galerkin method
[@Hughes1988], and the Petrov-Galerkin method [@Fung1996; @Fung1999],
while working directly with the differential equations rather than a
variational principle. Moreover, ST/FEM derived from the
time-discontinuous Galerkin (TDG) method led to the unconditionally
stable and high-order accurate ODE solvers
[@Delfour1981; @Johnson1986; @Lasaint1974]. The discontinuous Galerkin
(DG) method was first developed for the neutron-transport equation
@Lasaint1974 [@Reed1973]. Soon after, the TDG method was introduced by
Jamet [@Bonnerot1979; @Jamet1978] for solving the parabolic differential
equation with the time- dependent spatial domain. Almost a decade
afterwards, Hughes and Hulbert presented the time-discontinuous Galerkin
space-time FEM (TDG/ST/FEM) for the fields of elastodynamics and
structural dynamics [@Hughes1988]. In this paper, two general
formulations of TDG/ST/FEM were provided: (i) the single-field
formulation, in which the displacement field is the primary unknown, and
(ii) the two-field formulation, in which both the displacement field and
the velocity field are treated as the primary unknowns. In a latter
approach, the trial functions for both fields were continuous in space
and discontinuous in time, whereas the test functions were continuous in
both space and time. In the two-field formulation, the
displacement-velocity compatibility condition and the continuity of both
unknown fields in time were satisfied in a weak sense by using some
inner products. This is the key element allowing for the generalization
of TDG/ST/FEM developed for first order hyperbolic equations to the
second order hyperbolic equations [@Hughes1988]. However, the main
disadvantage of the two-field formulation is that it leads to larger
systems of coupled equations than formulations derived from direct
integration schemes. To overcome this difficulty, various efficient
iterative predictor-multi-corrector algorithms have been suggested by
@Li1998 [@Mancuso2003; @Chien2000; @Mancuso2006], among others. Details
on the numerical characteristics of two-field formulations, such as
stability, the order of accuracy, and algorithmic damping, have been
discussed elsewhere [@Fan1997; @Fung1996; @Hulbert1992].

At present, time-discontinuous Galerkin approach have been well studied
for the problems involving first order time derivatives. In the field of
computational fluid dynamics, this approach have been used for problems
involving the moving and free boundaries [@Bazilevs2013]. In TDG/ST/FEM,
shape-functions are usually defined on the space-time domain. Therefore,
such method may provide a unified framework for using the Lagrangian
mesh, Eulerian mesh, and Arbitrary moving mesh. In addition, for
problems involving the second-order time derivatives TDG/ST/FEM
facilitates the weak-enforcement of initial conditions through
jump-discontinuity in time. In this way, TDG/ST/FEM provides a general
framework for arbitrary high order accurate, unconditionally stable time
integration algorithms. We believe that these characteristics of
TDG/ST/FEM may have great potential for solving the problems of
large-deformation dynamic problems.

Accordingly, in this chapter, a velocity-based single-field ST/FEM is
developed within a TDG framework. Hereafter, the term v-ST/FEM will be
used to denote the proposed method. In v-ST/FEM, velocity is the primary
unknowns which is discontinuous in time and continuous in space. The
displacement field is obtained by time integration of the velocity field
in a post-processing step. The advantage of v-ST/FEM is that it involves
less number of unknowns--unlike other ST/FEM--which makes v-ST/FEM
applicable to the large-scale practical problems at relatively low
computation cost.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. First, in Section
[2](#sec:ch3-sec2){reference-type="ref" reference="sec:ch3-sec2"}, the
concept of time-discontinuous Galerkin finite element method (TDG/FEM)
is explained for the first order ordinary differential equation (ODE) in
time. Subsequently, the numerical properties of the resultant algorithm
are discussed. Section [3](#sec:ch3-sec3){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:ch3-sec3"} extends these concepts to a second order ODE
in time. In this section, three types of TDG/FEM formulations are
presented; uv-TDG/FEM, u-TDG/FEM, and v-TDG/FEM. In uv-TDG/FEM, both
displacement and velocity are approximated by using the time
discontinuous trial functions, in addition, displacement-velocity
compatibility condition is weakly enforced. In u-TDG/FEM, displacement
is the primary unknown, and velocity is obtained by taking the time
derivative of the displacement. Accordingly, the displacement-velocity
relationship is strongly enforced. Lastly, in v-TDG/FEM velocity is the
primary unknown, and displacement is obtained in a post-processing step
by consistent time integration of the velocity field. Further, in
Section [4](#sec:ch3-sec4){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:ch3-sec4"} numerical properties of the TDG/FEM schemes
for second order ODE are discussed. The continuum theory of
elastodynamics and the initial-boundary value problem (IBVP) are
summarized in Section [5](#sec:ch3-sec5){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:ch3-sec5"}. Section
[6](#sec:ch3-sec6){reference-type="ref" reference="sec:ch3-sec6"}
describes the general theoretical development and formulation aspects of
the v-ST/FEM approach. In this section the implementation details of the
current methodology are also discussed. The applicability and the
validity of v-ST/FEM are then demonstrated in Section
[7](#sec:ch3-sec7){reference-type="ref" reference="sec:ch3-sec7"}
through different numerical examples.

# TDG/FEM for the first order ODE {#sec:ch3-sec2}

To understand the working principle of the time-discontinuous Galerkin
finite element method (TDG/FEM) consider the following initial value
problem [^1] described by a first order ordinary differential equation
equation (ODE).

$$\begin{split}\frac{{du}}{{dt}}+\lambda u-f\left(t\right) & =0\quad t\in\left[{0,T}\right],\\
u(0) & =u_{0}
\end{split}
\label{eq:ch3-eq-1}$$

where $T$ is the total time, $u:=u(t)$ is the primary unknown, $f(t)$
represents the excitation function, and $u_{0}$ is the initial
condition. The analytical solution to this problems takes the form of

$$u\left(t\right)={u_{0}}{e^{-\lambda t}}+\int_{0}^{t}{{e^{-\lambda\left({t-\tau}\right)}}f\left(\tau\right)d\tau}$$

Let us now consider a non-uniform subdivision for the time domain
$\left[{0,T}\right]$,

$$0={t_{0}}<{t_{1}}<\cdots<{t_{N}}=T,$$

with

$$\begin{aligned}
I_{n} & =(t_{n},t_{n}+1), & \Delta t_{n} & =t_{n+1}-t_{n}, & \Delta t=\mathop{\max}\limits_{\left({0\leqslant n\leqslant N-1}\right)}\left({\Delta{t_{n}}}\right).
\end{aligned}$$

![Discretization of time domain $\left[0,T\right]$ by using the
time-finite elements.](figures/ch3-fig-1){#fig:ch3-fig-1}

In the finite element method (FEM), the time interval, $I_{n}$, denotes
the interior of the one-dimensional time finite element, and
$\partial{I_{n}}=\left\{ {{t_{n}},{t_{n+1}}}\right\}$ denotes the
boundary of $I_{n}$ [^2]. Accordingly, the finite element discretization
of the continuous time domain can be written as (see also Fig.
[1](#fig:ch3-fig-1){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-1"}),

$${I_{h}}:=\bigcup\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{\left({{I_{n}}\cup\partial{I_{n}}}\right)}$$

In TDG/FEM, the solutions to the problem, $u^{h}(t)$, are considered to
be discontinuous at the boundary of the time-domain. The solutions,
however, remain continuous inside the time-finite element $I_{n}$, and
approximated by piecewise polynomials (e.g., Lagrange polynomials).
Therefore, the discontinuity in $u^{h}(t)$ occurs at times that belong
to the finite set $\left\{ {{t_{0}},{t_{1}},\cdots,{t_{N}}}\right\}$.
The jump discontinuity in time for $u^{h}$ is given by

$${\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{u^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}}=u_{n}^{+}-u_{n}^{-}\label{eq:ch3-eq-3}$$

where

$$\begin{aligned}
u_{n}^{+} & =\mathop{\lim}\limits_{\varepsilon\to0}{u^{h}}\left({t+\varepsilon}\right), & u_{n}^{-} & =\mathop{\lim}\limits_{\varepsilon\to0}{u^{h}}\left({t-\varepsilon}\right)\label{eq:ch3-eq-4}
\end{aligned}$$

are the discontinuous values of $u^{h}$ at time $t=t_{n}$. **Fig.
[2](#fig:ch3-fig-2){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-2"}**
illustrates the concept of time discontinuity.

![Schematic diagram of time discontinuous approximation: (a) piecewise
linear interpolation, and (b) piecewise quadratic
interpolation.](figures/ch3-fig-2){#fig:ch3-fig-2}

Let $C^{0}(\star)$ denote the space of piecewise continuous functions
defined on domain $(\star)$. In addition, consider
${\wp_{l}}\left({{I_{n}}}\right)$, the collection of all polynomials
defined on $I_{n}$ with a total degree of no more than $l$. Accordingly,
the functional space required for the TDG/FEM is given by,

$$\Im_{l}^{h}:=\left\{ {\left.{{u^{h}}}\right|{u^{h}}\in{C^{0}}\left({\bigcup\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{{I_{n}}}}\right),{{\left.{{u^{h}}}\right|}_{{I_{n}}}}\in{\wp_{l}}\left({{I_{n}}}\right)}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-5}$$

where, ${{u^{h}}}$, denotes the global solutions which can be
discontinuous at time steps given by the end points of the interval
$I_{n}$, and ${{{\left.{{u^{h}}}\right|}_{{I_{n}}}}}$ denotes the
restriction of $u_{h}$ to $I_{n}$.

## Weak forms for the TDG/FEM

For any $\delta u^{h},u^{h}\in\Im_{l}^{h}$ consider the following
variational form corresponding to
 Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-1\]](#eq:ch3-eq-1){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-1"} ,

$$\delta\Pi_{n}:=\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta u^{h}\left({\frac{{du^{h}}}{{dt}}+\lambda u^{h}-f\left(t\right)}\right)dt}\label{eq:ch3-eq-6}$$

or

$$\delta\Pi_{n}=\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta u^{h}\frac{{du^{h}}}{{dt}}dt}+\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta u^{h}\left[{\lambda u^{h}-f\left(t\right)}\right]dt}\label{eq:ch3-eq-7}$$

Here, once again note that the domain of integration is $I_{n}$, and
$u^{h}$ is discontinuous at times $t_{n}$ and $t_{n+1}$.

Use of the integration by parts for the first term in
 Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-7\]](#eq:ch3-eq-7){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-7"}  will result in the following variation form
for the TDG/FEM,

$$\delta\Pi_{n}=-\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{u^{h}\frac{{d\delta u^{h}}}{{dt}}dt}+\left[{\delta u^{h}\cdot{u^{*}}}\right]_{{t_{n}}}^{{t_{n+1}}}+\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta u^{h}\left[{\lambda u^{h}-f\left(t\right)}\right]dt}\label{eq:ch3-eq-8}$$

where, $u^{*}$ denotes the unique value of $u^{h}$ to be used at the
end-points of the interval $I_{n}$ and obtained by computing the
information from the neighboring time intervals. A detailed definition
concerning its concrete value will be soon introduced in the following
text.

Subsequent use of the integration by parts for the first term in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-8\]](#eq:ch3-eq-8){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-8"} will yield another variation form for the
TDG/FEM. This variation form is described below.

$$\delta\Pi_{n}=\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta u^{h}\frac{{du^{h}}}{{dt}}dt}+\left[{\delta u^{h}\left({{u^{*}}-u^{h}}\right)}\right]_{{t_{n}}}^{{t_{n+1}}}+\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta u^{h}\left[{\lambda u^{h}-f\left(t\right)}\right]dt}\label{eq:ch3-eq-9}$$

Mathematically, the formulations given in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-8\]](#eq:ch3-eq-8){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-8"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-9\]](#eq:ch3-eq-9){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-9"} are the TDG/FEM schemes for Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-1\]](#eq:ch3-eq-1){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-1"} in weak and strong form, respectively. In Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-8\]](#eq:ch3-eq-8){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-8"} due to the presence of first order time
derivative of the test function $\delta u^{h}$, the test function should
be continuous in time. In Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-9\]](#eq:ch3-eq-9){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-9"}, however, the continuity of the test functions
is not required since this form does not include the time derivative of
$\delta u^{h}$.

In Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-8\]](#eq:ch3-eq-8){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-8"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-9\]](#eq:ch3-eq-9){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-9"}, recall that the solution $(u^{h})$ is not well
defined at the $\partial I_{n}=\left\{ {{t_{n}},{t_{n+1}}}\right\}$ as
it takes two values at each end-points of $I_{n}$. Hence, a unique
representative value $u^{*}$ has been adopted in the TDG formulation
which should be specified only at time $\partial I_{n}$. The value of
$u^{*}$ at time $t_{n}$ can be computed by using $u_{n}^{+}$ and
$u_{n}^{-}$ (see the footnote). [^3] The most widely used definition for
$u^{*}$ is based on the upwind flux treatment in time
[@Eriksson1985; @Chen2006; @Cockburn2003; @Hesthaven2007] and given by,

$$u^{*}:=\left\{ \begin{array}{cc}
u_{0} & \text{if}\quad n=0\\
u_{n}^{-} & otherwise
\end{array}\right.\label{eq:ch3-eq-10}$$

The choice of such a definition is inspired by the fact that in a
transient problem the solutions at time $t_{n}$ should be equal to the
value of its immediate past $t_{n}-\varepsilon$. Therefore, it is
natural to start the numerical procedure at $t=t_{0}$ with the
prescribed initial condition $u^{*}=u_{0}$, and transport this idea to
the subsequent time-slabs.

Incorporating the definition of $u^{*}$ in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-9\]](#eq:ch3-eq-9){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-9"},
$$\delta{\Pi_{n}}=\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{u^{h}}\frac{{d{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}dt}+\delta{u^{h}}\left({{t_{n}}}\right){\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{u^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}}+\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{u^{h}}\left[{\lambda{u^{h}}-f\left(t\right)}\right]dt}\label{eq:ch3-eq-11}$$

Let us now focus on the TDG/FEM weak form for the initial value problem
 (see Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-1\]](#eq:ch3-eq-1){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-1"}) . By multiplying the residual of Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-1\]](#eq:ch3-eq-1){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-1"} with the test function $\delta u^{h}$ and then
integrating in the time domain $\left[{0,T}\right]$ following weak form
can be obtained.

$$\delta\Pi:=\int_{I}^ {}{\delta u\left[{\frac{{du}}{{dt}}+\lambda u-f\left(t\right)}\right]dt}=\sum\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{\delta{\Pi_{n}}}=0\label{eq:ch3-eq-12}$$

Due to the weakly prescribed initial condition, the weak form given
above transforms into a local weak form defined on each time slab
$I_{n}$.

$$\delta{\Pi_{n}}=\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{u^{h}}\frac{{d{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}dt}+\delta{u^{h}}\left({{t_{n}}}\right){\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{u^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}}+\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{u^{h}}\lambda{u^{h}}dt}-\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{u^{h}}f\left(t\right)dt}=0\label{eq:ch3-eq-13}$$

Rearranging the terms in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-13\]](#eq:ch3-eq-13){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-13"} and using the expression for the jump
discontinuity in time (see
 Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-3\]](#eq:ch3-eq-3){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-3"} ),

$$\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{u^{h}}\frac{{d{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}dt}+\delta{u_{n}}u_{n}^{+}+\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{u^{h}}\lambda{u^{h}}dt}=\delta{u_{n}}u_{n}^{-}+\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{u^{h}}f\left(t\right)dt}\label{eq:ch3-eq-14}$$

in which the first term on right hand side depicts the initial condition
for each time-slabs $I_{n}$. Here note that the information about
$u_{n}^{-}$ is already obtained from the computation in the previous
time slab $I_{n-1}$. Further, in the beginning of the process (i.e.,
$n=0$) the initial condition is incorporated in the computation
according to the definition in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-10\]](#eq:ch3-eq-10){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-10"}. In this way, initial boundary condition
becomes the part of the solution and need not to be specified in
explicit terms.

## Implementation of the TDG/FEM

One dimensional time-finite elements can be employed to discretize the
TDG/FEM weak form presented in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-11\]](#eq:ch3-eq-11){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-11"}. In this process, the solutions are locally
approximated by using the shape functions. These shape functions are
generally given by the Lagrange polynomials, and determine the degree of
accuracy. To construct a $p$-order Lagrange polynomial in time-domain,
$p+1$ nodes should be selected inside the time slab $I_{n}$; two nodes
are always located at the end-points $t_{n}$ and $t_{n+1}$, and
remaining $p-1$ nodes are distributed inside $I_{n}$ (see Fig.
[3](#fig:ch3-fig-3){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-3"}).
The internal nodes are generally located at equidistant points in
$I_{n}$. [^4]

Consider the parent time-domain $I_{\theta}:=\left[-1,1\right]$ on which
the Lagrange polynomials $T_{i}^{(p)}(\theta)$ are defined. Here, $p$
denotes the degree of polynomial, and $i=1,\cdots,p+1$ corresponds to
the $p+1$ locations
$$\left\{ {{\theta_{1}},{\theta_{2}},\cdots,{\theta_{p+1}}}\right\}$$ in
$I_{\theta}$ with $\theta_{1}=-1$ and $\theta_{2}=+1$. Let
$$\left\{ {t_{1}^{(n)},t_{2}^{(n)},\cdots,t_{p}^{(n)},t_{p+1}^{(n)}}\right\}$$
be the set of $p+1$ time-nodes in $I_{n}$ with $t_{1}^{(n)}=t_{n}$,
$t_{2}^{(n)}=t_{n}+1$. The internal nodes are represented by
$t_{i}^{(n)}=t_{n}$ for $i=3,\cdots,p+1$ (see Fig.
[3](#fig:ch3-fig-3){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-3"}).

![Conceptual diagram of (a) $p$-order time-finite element with $p+1$
local time nodes, (b) two node linear time-finite
element.](figures/ch3-fig-3){#fig:ch3-fig-3}

Further, the relationship between $t\in I_{n}$ and
$\theta\in I_{\theta}$ is given by a linear mapping,

$$t(\theta)=\frac{{\left({1-\theta}\right)}}{2}{t_{n}}+\frac{{\left({1+\theta}\right)}}{2}{t_{n+1}}.\label{eq:ch3-eq-15}$$
The expression for the Lagrange polynomial of degree $p$ is described as
follows: $$T_{i}^{(p)}=\prod\limits_{\begin{subarray}{l}
j=1\\
j\ne i
\end{subarray}}^{p+1}{\frac{{\theta-{\theta_{j}}}}{{{\theta_{i}}-{\theta_{j}}}}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-16}$$

Here, note that
$$T_{i}^{\left(p\right)}\left(\theta_{j}\right)=\left\{ \begin{array}{cc}
1 & \text{if}\quad i=j\\
0 & \text{if}\quad i\ne j
\end{array}\right.$$

Accordingly, the $p$-order local approximation for the trial function
$u^{h}$ reads,
$${u^{h}}=T_{1}^{(p)}u_{n}^{+}+T_{2}^{(p)}u_{n+1}^{-}+\sum\limits_{a=3}^{p+1}{T_{a}^{(p)}u_{a}^{(n)}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-17}$$

In Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-17\]](#eq:ch3-eq-17){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-17"} $u_{n}^{+}$ and $u_{n+1}^{-}$ represent the
discontinuous nodal values at times $t=(t_{n}+\varepsilon)\in I_{n}$ and
$t=(t_{n+1}-\varepsilon)\in I_{n}$ (see also Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-4\]](#eq:ch3-eq-4){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-4"}), respectively. Further, the values of $u^{h}$
at the internal nodes of $I_{n}$ are given by $u_{a}^{(n)}$, for
$a=3,\cdots,p+1$, which are well defined in the time-slab $I_{n}$. For
the sake of clarity, let us denote, $$u_{1}^{(n)}=u_{n}^{+},$$
$$u_{2}^{(n)}=u_{n+1}^{-}.$$ With such convention Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-17\]](#eq:ch3-eq-17){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-17"} becomes
$${u^{h}}=\sum\limits_{a=1}^{p+1}{T_{a}^{(p)}u_{a}^{(n)}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-18}$$
Similarly, the $p$-order local approximation for the test function
$\delta u^{h}$ can be given by,
$$\delta{u^{h}}=\sum\limits_{a=1}^{p+1}{T_{a}^{(p)}\delta u_{a}^{(n)}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-19}$$

Subsequently, using the above interpolations for $u^{h}$ and
$\delta u^{h}$ in the weak-form given by Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-14\]](#eq:ch3-eq-14){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-14"} one can get the following discretized form.
Henceforth, the use of summation symbol is avoided and Einstein
summation convention is implied.

$$\begin{split} & \delta u_{a}^{(n)}\left\{ {\left[{\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}\frac{{dT_{b}^{(p)}}}{{dt}}dt}}\right]u_{b}^{(n)}+\left[{\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}\lambda T_{b}^{(p)}dt}}\right]u_{b}^{(n)}-\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}f\left(t\right)dt}}\right\} \\
 & +\delta u_{1}^{(n)}\left({u_{1}^{(n)}-u_{n}^{-}}\right)=0
\end{split}
\label{eq:ch3-eq-20}$$

Further, using the Kronecker delta function $\delta_{ab}$ in the last
term of the above equation,
$$\delta u_{1}^{(n)}\left({u_{1}^{(n)}-u_{n}^{-}}\right)=\delta u_{a}^{(n)}{\delta_{a1}}{\delta_{b1}}\left({u_{b}^{(n)}-u_{n}^{-}}\right),$$
Accordingly, Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-20\]](#eq:ch3-eq-20){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-20"} becomes,

$$\delta u_{a}^{(n)}\left\{ {\left[{\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}\frac{{dT_{b}^{(p)}}}{{dt}}dt}+{\delta_{a1}}{\delta_{b1}}+\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}\lambda T_{b}^{(p)}dt}}\right]u_{b}^{(n)}-{\delta_{a1}}u_{n}^{-}-\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}f\left(t\right)dt}}\right\} =0\label{eq:ch3-eq-21}$$

Since Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-20\]](#eq:ch3-eq-20){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-20"} is true for all $\delta_{a}^{(n)}$, one can
get the following system of $p+1$ algebraic equations.
$$\left[m\right]_{}^{ab}u_{b}^{(n)}+\lambda{\left[c\right]^{ab}}u_{b}^{(n)}={\delta_{a1}}u_{n}^{-}+{\left\{ J_{ext}\right\} ^{a}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-22}$$
where $\left[m\right]_{}^{ab}$ and $\left[c\right]_{}^{ab}$ are the
$(p+1)\times(p+1)$ finite element matrices, and
${\left\{ f\right\} ^{a}}$ is a vector of length $p+1$. The
matrix-vector form of above equation is depicted by
$$\left[{\mathbf{m}}\right]\left\{ {{\mathbf{\tilde{u}}}}\right\} +\lambda\left[{\mathbf{c}}\right]\left\{ {{\mathbf{\tilde{u}}}}\right\} =\left\{ {{\mathbf{e}}_{1}^{p}}\right\} u_{n}^{-}+\left\{ {\mathbf{J_{ext}}}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-23}$$
The details about the terms present in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-21\]](#eq:ch3-eq-21){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-21"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-22\]](#eq:ch3-eq-22){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-22"} are given below.

$$\left[{\mathbf{m}}\right]:=\left[m\right]_{}^{ab}=\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}\frac{{dT_{b}^{(p)}}}{{dt}}dt}+{\delta_{a1}}{\delta_{b1}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-24}$$

$$\left[{\mathbf{c}}\right]:={\left[c\right]^{ab}}=\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}T_{b}^{(p)}dt}\label{eq:ch3-eq-25}$$

$$\left\{ {{\mathbf{e}}_{1}^{p}}\right\} :={\delta_{a1}}=\left\{ {1,0,\cdots,0}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-26}$$

$$\left\{ {\mathbf{J_{ext}}}\right\} :={\left\{ J_{ext}\right\} ^{a}}=\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}f\left(t\right)dt}\label{eq:ch3-eq-27}$$

In this way, at the beginning of the computation (i.e., n=0) the initial
condition $u_{0}$ is used to compute the right hand side of Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-23\]](#eq:ch3-eq-23){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-23"}, and then the system of linear equations is
solved to obtain $u_{1}^{-}$. This information is then used for
constructing the right hand side for the next time slab.

In the subsequent sections, the numerical analysis of the TDG/FEM for
the first order ODE is discussed. Henceforth, for the sake of
simplicity, only the case of linear interpolation in time (i.e., $p=1$)
is discussed.

In case of the linear interpolation in time the shape functions are
given by $$\begin{aligned}
T_{1}(\theta):=T_{1}^{(1)} & =\frac{1-\theta}{2} & T_{2}(\theta):=T_{2}^{(1)} & =\frac{1+\theta}{2}.\label{eq:ch3-eq-28}
\end{aligned}$$ In this case, two linear equations in two unknowns
$u_{n}^{+}$ and $u_{n+1}^{-}$ can be obtained. These equations are
described below in the matrix-vector form.

$$\frac{1}{2}\left[\begin{array}{cc}
1 & 1\\
-1 & 1
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
u_{n}^{+}\\
u_{n+1}^{-}
\end{array}\right\} +\lambda\frac{\Delta t_{n}}{6}\left[\begin{array}{cc}
2 & 1\\
1 & 2
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
u_{n}^{+}\\
u_{n+1}^{-}
\end{array}\right\} =\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
u_{n}^{-}\\
0
\end{array}\right\} +\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
J_{ext}^{1}\\
J_{ext}^{2}
\end{array}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-29}$$ where $J_{ext}^{1}$ and
$J_{ext}^{2}$ are given by $$\begin{aligned}
{J_{ext}^{1}} & =\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{{T_{1}}f\left(t\right)dt}\\
{J_{ext}^{2}} & =\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{{T_{2}}f\left(t\right)dt}
\end{aligned}$$

## Stability analysis of the TDG/FEM

Let us denote the exact value of the solution at any instant $t_{n}$ by
$u(t_{n})$ and the corresponding numerical value obtained by TDG/FEM by
$u_{n}^{-}$. Let the error in $u_{n}^{-}$ be denoted by:
$$e(t_{n}):=u_{n}^{-}-u(t_{n})\label{eq:ch3-eq-30}$$

To motivate the appropriate notion of stability for the ease under
consideration, let us investigate the behavior of the homogeneous form
of Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-1\]](#eq:ch3-eq-1){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-1"}.[^5] The exact solutions of the homogeneous ODE
is given by [@Hughes2012 Chapter 8]

$$u\left({{t_{n}}}\right)={u_{0}}{\operatorname{e}^{-\lambda{t_{n}}}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-31}$$

At time $t=t_{n+1}$ the exact solutions can be described as,
$$u\left({{t_{n+1}}}\right)=u\left({{t_{n}}}\right){\operatorname{e}^{-\lambda\Delta{t_{n}}}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-32}$$
In Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-32\]](#eq:ch3-eq-32){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-32"} one should note that the exact solutions decay
in time for $\lambda>0$, and mathematically the solutions can be
characterized by: $$\left.\begin{array}{cc}
\left|{u\left({{t_{n+1}}}\right)}\right|<\left|{u\left({{t_{n}}}\right)}\right|, & {\lambda>0}\\
{u\left({{t_{n+1}}}\right)=u\left({{t_{n}}}\right),} & {\lambda=0}
\end{array}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-33}$$

In homogeneous case Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-29\]](#eq:ch3-eq-29){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-29"} becomes $$\frac{1}{2}\left[\begin{array}{cc}
1 & 1\\
{-1} & 1
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{n}^{+}}\\
{u_{n+1}^{-}}
\end{array}\right\} +\lambda\frac{{\Delta{t_{n}}}}{6}\left[\begin{array}{c}
{u_{n}^{+}}\\
{u_{n+1}^{-}}
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{n}^{+}}\\
{u_{n+1}^{-}}
\end{array}\right\} =\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{n}^{-}}\\
0
\end{array}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-34}$$ By eliminating $u_{n}^{+}$
from above equations we can get
$$u_{n+1}^{-}=Au_{n}^{-}\label{eq:ch3-eq-35}$$ where,
$$A=\frac{{6-2\Omega}}{{{\Omega^{2}}+4\Omega+6}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-36}$$
is called the *amplification factor*, and $\Omega=\lambda\Delta t_{n}$.

For the stability of the TDG/FEM it is necessary that
$$\left.{\begin{array}{cc}
{\left|{u_{n+1}^{-}}\right|<\left|{u_{n}^{-}}\right|,} & {\lambda>0}\\
{u_{n+1}^{-}=u_{n}^{-},} & {\lambda=0}
\end{array}}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-37}$$ From the definition of $A$
(see Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-36\]](#eq:ch3-eq-36){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-36"}), second condition of Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-37\]](#eq:ch3-eq-37){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-37"} is satisfied. The first condition is always
satisfied if amplification factor satisfies the following,
$$\left|A\right|<1\label{eq:ch3-eq-38}$$ Fig.
[4](#fig:ch3-fig-4){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-4"}
plots the variation of amplification factor with the dimensionless time
$\Omega=\lambda\Delta t_{n}$, where it is evident that the TDG/FEM
algorithm always satisfies the above-mentioned condition (cf. Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-38\]](#eq:ch3-eq-38){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-38"}). Thus, it is proved that the TDG/FEM is an
*unconditionally stable* algorithm.

![Amplification factor for the time-discontinuous Galerkin method for
the first order ODE with linear interpolation in
time.](figures/ch3-fig-4){#fig:ch3-fig-4 width="80%"}

## Convergence analysis of the TDG/FEM

TDG/FEM algorithm will be called convergent if for $t_{n}$ fixed,
$u_{n}^{-}\rightarrow u(t_{n})$ as $\Delta t\rightarrow0$. To establish
the convergence of an algorithm, two additional notion must be
considered: *stability* and *consistency*. In the previous section it
has been shown that the TDG/FEM algorithm is unconditionally stable.
Therefore, in this section, the consistency of the algorithm will be
proven.

Rewriting the temporally discrete model problem described by Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-35\]](#eq:ch3-eq-35){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-35"} in the form,
$$u_{n+1}^{-}-Au_{n}^{-}=0\label{eq:ch3-eq-39}$$ Replacing $u_{n}^{-}$
and $u_{n+1}^{-}$ with the exact values $u(t_{n})$ and $u(t_{n+1})$,
respectively, following expression is obtained
$$u(t_{n+1})-Au(t_{n})=\Delta t_{n}\cdot\tau(t_{n})\label{eq:ch3-eq-40}$$
where $\tau(t_{n})$ is called the *local truncation error*.

::: definition
**Definition 1**. The algorithm defined by Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-39\]](#eq:ch3-eq-39){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-39"} is called *consistent* if
$\left|{\tau(t)}\right|\leqslant c\Delta{t^{k}}$, for all
$t\in\left[0,T\right]$, where $c$ is a constant independent of
$\Delta t$, and $k>0$. Moreover, $k$ is called the *order of accuracy*
or *rate of convergence*.
:::

To show that TDG/FEM algorithm is consistent use Taylor expansion for
$u(t_{n+1})$ about $t_{n}$,
$$u\left({{t_{n+1}}}\right)=u\left({{t_{n}}}\right)+\Delta{t_{n}}\frac{{d{u_{n}}}}{{dt}}+\frac{{\Delta t_{n}^{2}}}{2}\frac{{{d^{2}}{u_{n}}}}{{d{t^{2}}}}+\frac{{\Delta t_{n}^{3}}}{6}\frac{{{d^{3}}{u_{n}}}}{{d{t^{3}}}}+O\left({\Delta{t^{2}}}\right)\label{eq:ch3-eq-41}$$
using the homogeneous form of model equation to eliminate the time
derivatives in above equation one can get,
$$u\left({{t_{n+1}}}\right)=\left({1-\Omega+\frac{{{\Omega^{2}}}}{2}-\frac{{{\Omega^{3}}}}{6}}\right)u\left({{t_{n}}}\right)+O\left({\Delta{t^{2}}}\right)\label{eq:ch3-eq-42}$$
From Eq. ([\[eq:ch3-eq-36\]](#eq:ch3-eq-36){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-36"},
[\[eq:ch3-eq-40\]](#eq:ch3-eq-40){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-40"}, and
[\[eq:ch3-eq-42\]](#eq:ch3-eq-42){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-42"}) it follows that,
$$\left|{\tau(t)}\right|\leqslant\frac{1}{{36}}\Delta t_{n}^{3}\qquad\forall t\in\left[{0,T}\right]\label{eq:ch3-eq-43}$$
This completes the proof that TDG/FEM algorithm is consistent.

::: remark
*Remark 1*. Therefore, the TDG/FEM algorithm is consistent and
unconditionally stable which also proves the convergence of the
algorithm according to the Lax equivalence theorem. [^6]
:::

::: remark
*Remark 2*. The TDG/FEM is a third order accurate algorithm for the
linear interpolation in time. Moreover, the scheme can be classified as
a single-step algorithm.
:::

# TDG/FEM for the second order ODE {#sec:ch3-sec3}

Consider a mass-spring-dashpot system as depicted in Fig.
[5](#fig:ch3-fig-5){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-5"}. The
governing equation of motion is described by the following second order
initial value problem in time.
$$\begin{split}\frac{{{d^{2}}u}}{{d{t^{2}}}}+2\zeta{\omega_{n}}\frac{{du}}{{dt}}+\omega_{n}^{2}u & =f\left(t\right)\quad\forall t\in\left[0,T\right]\\
u(0) & =u_{0}\\
\frac{du(0)}{dt} & =v_{0}
\end{split}
\label{eq:ch3-eq-44}$$ where $u:=u(t)$ is the unknown displacement,
$f(t)$ is the external force acting on the system. Further, $u_{0}$ and
$v_{0}$ are the prescribed initial values of the displacement and
velocity, respectively. Damping ratio $\zeta$ and the natural frequency
of vibration $\omega_{n}$ of the system are related to the mass $m$,
stiffness of the spring $k$, and damping coefficient $c$ by:
$$\begin{aligned}
\omega_{n} & =\sqrt{k/m}, & \zeta & =\frac{c}{2m\omega_{n}}=\frac{c}{2\sqrt{mk}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-45}
\end{aligned}$$

![Schematic diagram of the mass-spring-dashpot
system](figures/ch3-fig-5){#fig:ch3-fig-5}

Further, the TDG/FEM for solving the second order ODE can be arranged
into two categories; the displacement-velocity based two-field TDG/FEM,
and the single-field TDG/FEM. These strategies are discussed in the
following sections.

## Two-field TDG/FEM

In the two-field TDG/FEM, both the displacement ($u$) and the velocity
($v$) are independently interpolated using the piecewise polynomials.
[^7] The interpolation is performed such that within a time-slab $I_{n}$
the solutions remain continuous, and at the end-points (i.e., $t_{n}$
and $t_{n+1}$) the solutions are discontinuous. Accordingly, the set
$\left\{ t_{1},t_{2},\cdots,t_{N}\right\}$ denotes the locations in time
where discontinuity in solutions occur. Thus, the displacement and
velocity are the primary unknowns in the uv-TDG/FEM.

Therefore, the critical step in solving the second order initial value
problem using the uv-TDG/FEM involves recasting of Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-44\]](#eq:ch3-eq-44){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-44"} into a system of two first-order ODEs. The new
system is then described by
$$\frac{{dv}}{{dt}}+2\zeta{\omega_{n}}v+\omega_{n}^{2}u=f\left(t\right)\quad\forall t\in[0,T]\label{eq:ch3-eq-46}$$
$$\frac{{du}}{{dt}}-v=0\quad\forall t\in[0,T]\label{eq:ch3-eq-47}$$
$$u(0)={u_{0}},\quad v(0)={v_{0}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-48}$$

Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-46\]](#eq:ch3-eq-46){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-46"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-47\]](#eq:ch3-eq-47){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-47"} represent the first order ODE, and the TDG/FEM
described in the previous section can be employed directly. However,
note that these two equations cannot be solved independently due to the
coupling between displacement and velocity.

Following the same procedure as described in the previous section (see
Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-6\]](#eq:ch3-eq-6){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-6"}--[\[eq:ch3-eq-14\]](#eq:ch3-eq-14){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-14"}), the weak-form of the uv-TDG/FEM can be
stated as:

::: weakform
*Weak-form 1*. Find $u^{h}\in\Im_{l}^{h}$ and $v^{h}\in\Im_{l}^{h}$,
such that for all $\delta u^{h}\in\Im_{l}^{h}$ and
$\delta v^{h}\in\Im_{l}^{h}$, and for all $n=0,\cdots,N-1$ Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-49\]](#eq:ch3-eq-49){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-49"} holds.

$$\begin{split} & \int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{v^{h}}}\left({\frac{{d{v^{h}}}}{{dt}}+2\zeta{\omega_{n}}{v^{h}}+\omega_{n}^{2}{u^{h}}-f\left(t\right)}\right)dt+\delta{v^{h}}\left({{t_{n}}}\right){\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{v^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}}\\
 & +\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{u^{h}}\left({\frac{{d{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}-{v^{h}}}\right)dt+\delta{u^{h}}\left({{t_{n}}}\right){{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{u^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]}_{n}}=0}
\end{split}
\label{eq:ch3-eq-49}$$
:::

A careful examination of uv-TDG/FEM weak-form leads to the following
remarks.

::: remark
*Remark 3*. In the above weak-form, the presence of jump discontinuity
in time for the displacement,
${{{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{u^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]}_{n}}}$,
and for the velocity,
${{{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{v^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]}_{n}}}$,
correspond to the weakly enforced initial condition for the displacement
and velocity, respectively.
:::

::: remark
*Remark 4*. Since the selection of the test functions, $\delta u^{h}$
and $\delta v^{h}$, are independent from each other Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-49\]](#eq:ch3-eq-49){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-49"} can be depicted by the combination of
following two variational forms.
$$\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{v^{h}}}\left({\frac{{d{v^{h}}}}{{dt}}+2\zeta{\omega_{n}}{v^{h}}+\omega_{n}^{2}{u^{h}}-f\left(t\right)}\right)dt+\delta{v^{h}}\left({{t_{n}}}\right){\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{v^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}}=0\label{eq:ch3-eq-50}$$
$$\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{u^{h}}\left({\frac{{d{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}-{v^{h}}}\right)dt+\delta{u^{h}}\left({{t_{n}}}\right){{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{u^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]}_{n}}=0}\label{eq:ch3-eq-51}$$
From Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-51\]](#eq:ch3-eq-51){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-51"} it follows that in two-field TDG/FEM, the
displacement-velocity compatibility relationship is satisfied in weak
form.
:::

::: remark
*Remark 5*. It is of course possible to use the different order
interpolation for the displacement and velocity in the above weak-form.
Only equal order interpolations, however, yield useful and efficient
algorithms [@Hulbert1992].
:::

Let us now focus on the discretization of the two-field TDG weak-form.
The discretization will be performed by using the locally defined
$p$-order test and trial functions of the form, $$\begin{aligned}
{u^{h}} & =\sum\limits_{a=1}^{p+1}{T_{a}^{\left(p\right)}u_{a}^{(n)}}, & \delta{u^{h}} & =\sum\limits_{a=1}^{p+1}{T_{a}^{\left(p\right)}\delta u_{a}^{(n)}}, & \forall t\in I_{n}\label{eq:ch3-eq-52}
\end{aligned}$$ $$\begin{aligned}
{v^{h}} & =\sum\limits_{a=1}^{p+1}{T_{a}^{\left(p\right)}v_{a}^{(n)}}, & \delta{v^{h}} & =\sum\limits_{a=1}^{p+1}{T_{a}^{\left(p\right)}\delta v_{a}^{(n)}}, & \forall t\in I_{n}\label{eq:ch3-eq-53}
\end{aligned}$$ where ${T_{a}^{\left(p\right)}}$ are the $p$-order
Lagrange polynomials, and given by Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-16\]](#eq:ch3-eq-16){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-16"}. Besides, in above equation, following
conventions have been used. $$\begin{aligned}
u_{1}^{(n)} & =u_{n}^{+}, & u_{2}^{(n)} & =u_{n+1}^{-}, & v_{1}^{(n)} & =v_{n}^{+}, & v_{2}^{(n)} & =v_{n+1}^{-}
\end{aligned}$$ where $(u_{n}^{+},u_{n+1}^{-})$ and
$(v_{n}^{+},v_{n+1}^{-})$ denote the discontinuous values of the
displacement and velocity, respectively (cf. Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-4\]](#eq:ch3-eq-4){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-4"}).

Subsequently, using the test functions and trial function in the
weak-form (Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-49\]](#eq:ch3-eq-49){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-49"}) to obtain the following discretized form.
$$\begin{split} & \delta v_{a}^{(n)}\left[{\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}}\left({\frac{{dT_{b}^{(p)}}}{{dt}}}\right)dt+{\delta_{1a}}{\delta_{1b}}}\right]v_{b}^{(n)}+\delta v_{a}^{(n)}\left[{2\zeta{\omega_{n}}\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}}T_{b}^{(p)}dt}\right]v_{b}^{(n)}\\
 & +\delta v_{a}^{(n)}\left[{\omega_{n}^{2}\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}}T_{b}^{(p)}dt}\right]u_{b}^{(n)}-\delta v_{a}^{(n)}\left\{ {\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}}f(t)dt}\right\} -\delta v_{a}^{(n)}\left\{ {{\delta_{1a}}v_{n}^{-}}\right\} \\
 & \delta u_{a}^{(n)}\left[{\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}\frac{{dT_{b}^{(p)}}}{{dt}}dt}+{\delta_{1a}}{\delta_{1b}}}\right]u_{b}^{(n)}\\
 & -\delta u_{a}^{(n)}\left[{\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}T_{b}^{(p)}dt}}\right]v_{b}^{(n)}-\delta u_{a}^{(n)}\left\{ {{\delta_{1a}}u_{n}^{-}}\right\} =0
\end{split}
\label{eq:ch3-eq-54}$$

Since Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-54\]](#eq:ch3-eq-54){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-54"} is true for all $\delta u_{a}^{(n)}$ and
$\delta v_{a}^{(n)}$, one can get the following system of $2p+2$ number
of algebraic equations.

$${\left[m\right]^{ab}}v_{b}^{(n)}+2\zeta{\omega_{n}}{\left[c\right]^{ab}}v_{b}^{(n)}+\omega_{n}^{2}{\left[c\right]^{ab}}u_{b}^{(n)}={\left\{ {{J_{ext}}}\right\} ^{a}}+{\left\{ {J_{0}^{v}}\right\} ^{a}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-55}$$
$${\left[m\right]^{ab}}u_{b}^{(n)}-{\left[c\right]^{ab}}v_{b}^{(n)}={\left\{ {J_{0}^{u}}\right\} ^{a}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-56}$$

The matrix-vector form of Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-55\]](#eq:ch3-eq-55){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-55"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-56\]](#eq:ch3-eq-56){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-56"} is given by Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-57\]](#eq:ch3-eq-57){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-57"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-58\]](#eq:ch3-eq-58){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-58"}, respectively.
$$\left[{\mathbf{m}}\right]\left\{ {{\mathbf{\tilde{v}}}}\right\} +2\zeta{\omega_{n}}\left[{\mathbf{c}}\right]\left\{ {{\mathbf{\tilde{v}}}}\right\} +\omega_{n}^{2}\left[{\mathbf{c}}\right]\left\{ {{\mathbf{\tilde{u}}}}\right\} =\left\{ {{{\mathbf{J}}_{ext}}}\right\} +\left\{ {{\mathbf{J}}_{0}^{v}}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-57}$$
$$\left[{\mathbf{m}}\right]\left\{ {{\mathbf{\tilde{u}}}}\right\} -\left[{\mathbf{c}}\right]\left\{ {{\mathbf{\tilde{v}}}}\right\} =\left\{ {{\mathbf{J}}_{0}^{u}}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-58}$$

In Eqs. ([\[eq:ch3-eq-55\]](#eq:ch3-eq-55){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-55"}--[\[eq:ch3-eq-58\]](#eq:ch3-eq-58){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-58"}), the matrices $\left[{\mathbf{m}}\right]$,
$\left[{\mathbf{c}}\right]$, and the vector
$\left\{ {{{\mathbf{J}}_{ext}}}\right\}$ are given by Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-24\]](#eq:ch3-eq-24){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-24"}, Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-25\]](#eq:ch3-eq-25){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-25"}, and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-27\]](#eq:ch3-eq-27){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-27"}, respectively. The vectors,
$\left\{ {{\mathbf{J}}_{0}^{v}}\right\}$ (see Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-59\]](#eq:ch3-eq-59){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-59"}) and $\left\{ {{\mathbf{J}}_{0}^{u}}\right\}$
(see Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-60\]](#eq:ch3-eq-60){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-60"}) correspond to the initial value of the
velocity ($v_{n}^{-}$) and displacement ($u_{n}^{-}$), respectively.
$$\left\{ {{\mathbf{J}}_{0}^{v}}\right\} :={\left\{ {J_{0}^{v}}\right\} ^{a}}={\delta_{1a}}v_{n}^{-}\label{eq:ch3-eq-59}$$
$$\left\{ {{\mathbf{J}}_{0}^{u}}\right\} :={\left\{ {J_{0}^{u}}\right\} ^{a}}={\delta_{1a}}u_{n}^{-}\label{eq:ch3-eq-60}$$

::: remark
*Remark 6*. In any time-slab $I_{n}$, there are $p+1$ unknowns for the
velocity and $p+1$ unknowns for the displacement. Consequently, there
are total $2p+2$ unknowns to be determined in each time-slab. These
unknowns are computed by solving the system of $2p+2$ equations formed
by Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-57\]](#eq:ch3-eq-57){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-57"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-58\]](#eq:ch3-eq-58){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-58"}. Besides, in Eq.
([\[eq:ch3-eq-57\]](#eq:ch3-eq-57){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-57"}--[\[eq:ch3-eq-58\]](#eq:ch3-eq-58){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-58"}), the shape of all matrices and all vectors
are $(p+1)\times(p+1)$ and $(p+1)\times(1)$.
:::

If the displacement and the velocity are linearly interpolated in time
(i.e., $p=1$) using the shape function described by Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-28\]](#eq:ch3-eq-28){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-28"} then Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-57\]](#eq:ch3-eq-57){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-57"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-58\]](#eq:ch3-eq-58){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-58"} becomes

$$\begin{split}\frac{1}{2}\left[\begin{array}{cc}
1 & 1\\
{-1} & 1
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{v_{n}^{+}}\\
{v_{n+1}^{-}}
\end{array}\right\} +\zeta{\omega_{n}}\frac{{\Delta t}}{3}\left[\begin{array}{cc}
2 & 1\\
1 & 2
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{v_{n}^{+}}\\
{v_{n+1}^{-}}
\end{array}\right\} \\
+\omega_{n}^{2}\frac{{\Delta t}}{6}\left[\begin{array}{cc}
2 & 1\\
1 & 2
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{n}^{+}}\\
{u_{n+1}^{-}}
\end{array}\right\} =\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{v_{n}^{-}}\\
0
\end{array}\right\} +\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{J_{ext}^{1}}\\
{J_{ext}^{2}}
\end{array}\right\} 
\end{split}
\label{eq:ch3-eq-61}$$

$$\frac{1}{2}\left[\begin{array}{cc}
1 & 1\\
{-1} & 1
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{n}^{+}}\\
{u_{n+1}^{-}}
\end{array}\right\} -\frac{{\Delta t_{n}}}{6}\left[\begin{array}{cc}
2 & 1\\
1 & 2
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{v_{n}^{+}}\\
{v_{n+1}^{-}}
\end{array}\right\} =\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{n}^{-}}\\
0
\end{array}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-62}$$

In Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-61\]](#eq:ch3-eq-61){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-61"}, the expressions for $J_{ext}^{1}$ and
$J_{ext}^{2}$ are identical to those given in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-29\]](#eq:ch3-eq-29){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-29"}.

## Displacement based single-field TDG/FEM

In the displacement based single-field TDG/FEM (u-TDG/FEM) only
displacement is interpolated using the piecewise polynomials. The
displacement remains continuous within a time-slab $I_{n}$. However, at
the end-points (i.e., $t_{n}$ and $t_{n+1}$) displacement takes two
different values, for example, $u_{n}^{+}$ and $u_{n}^{-}$ at $t_{n}$.
In addition, the velocity is obtained by taking the time derivative of
the displacement. Thus, the velocity-displacement compatibility
relationship is naturally satisfied, and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-47\]](#eq:ch3-eq-47){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-47"} is no longer required to be solved. However,
note that both displacement and velocity still remain discontinuous in
time.

The weak form of the displacement based single-field TDG/FEM, which is
described below (see Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-63\]](#eq:ch3-eq-63){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-63"}), is obtained by considering the second order
ODE (cf. Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-44\]](#eq:ch3-eq-44){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-44"}).

::: weakform
*Weak-form 2*. u-TDG/FEM: Find $u^{h}\in\Im_{l}^{h}$ such that for all
$\delta u^{h}\in\Im_{l}^{h}$, and for all $n=0,\cdots,N-1$ Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-63\]](#eq:ch3-eq-63){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-63"} holds.
$$\begin{split}\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\frac{{d\delta{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}\left({\frac{{{d^{2}}{u^{h}}}}{{d{t^{2}}}}+2\zeta{\omega_{n}}\frac{{d{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}+\omega_{n}^{2}{u^{h}}-f(t)}\right)dt}\\
+\frac{{d\delta{u^{h}}({t_{n}})}}{{dt}}{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{\frac{{d{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}}+\delta{u^{h}}({t_{n}})\omega_{n}^{2}{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{u^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}}=0
\end{split}
\label{eq:ch3-eq-63}$$
:::

The above weak form is obtained by using the following intermediate
results
$$\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\frac{{d\delta{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}\frac{{{d^{2}}{u^{h}}}}{{d{t^{2}}}}dt}=\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\frac{{d\delta{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}\frac{{{d^{2}}{u^{h}}}}{{d{t^{2}}}}dt}+\left[{\frac{{d\delta{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}\left({{{\left({\frac{{du}}{{dt}}}\right)}^{*}}-\frac{{d{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}}\right)}\right]_{{t_{n}}}^{{t_{n+1}}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-64}$$
$$\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\frac{{d\delta{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}}\omega_{n}^{2}{u^{h}}dt=\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\frac{{d\delta{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}}\omega_{n}^{2}{u^{h}}dt+\left[{\delta{u^{h}}\omega_{n}^{2}\left({{u^{*}}-{u^{h}}}\right)}\right]_{{t_{n}}}^{{t_{n+1}}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-65}$$
These intermediate results are obtained by following the procedure
described in  Eq. ([\[eq:ch3-eq-7\]](#eq:ch3-eq-7){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-7"}--[\[eq:ch3-eq-9\]](#eq:ch3-eq-9){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-9"}) . Further, in above equations, ${{u^{*}}}$ and
${{{\left({\frac{{du}}{{dt}}}\right)}^{*}}}$ denote the unique
representative value of displacement and its first time derivative at
the end points of $I_{n}$ (here, recall that at $t_{n}$ and $t_{n+1}$
both displacement and its first time derivative are discontinuous).
Furthermore, by adopting the definition of representative values, which
is provided in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-10\]](#eq:ch3-eq-10){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-10"}, Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-64\]](#eq:ch3-eq-64){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-64"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-65\]](#eq:ch3-eq-65){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-65"} transform into
$$\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\frac{{d\delta{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}\frac{{{d^{2}}{u^{h}}}}{{d{t^{2}}}}dt}=\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\frac{{d\delta{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}\frac{{{d^{2}}{u^{h}}}}{{d{t^{2}}}}dt}+\frac{{d\delta{u^{h}}\left({{t_{n}}}\right)}}{{dt}}{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{\frac{{d{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-66}$$
$$\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\frac{{d\delta{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}}\omega_{n}^{2}{u^{h}}dt=\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\frac{{d\delta{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}}\omega_{n}^{2}{u^{h}}dt+\delta{u^{h}}({t_{n}})\omega_{n}^{2}{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{u^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-67}$$

Let us now focus on the discretization of the u-TDG/FEM weak-form given
in Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-63\]](#eq:ch3-eq-63){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-63"}. Here, for the sake of clarity, the
discretization will be performed by using the locally defined quadratic
test and trial functions of the form $$\begin{aligned}
{u^{h}} & =u_{1}^{(n)}{T_{1}}+u_{2}^{(n)}{T_{2}}+u_{3}^{(n)}{T_{3}}, & \delta{u^{h}} & =\delta u_{1}^{(n)}{T_{1}}+\delta u_{2}^{(n)}{T_{2}}+\delta u_{3}^{(n)}{T_{3}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-68}
\end{aligned}$$ where, $T_{1}$, $T_{2}$, and $T_{3}$ are the quadratic
shape functions described as follows. $$\begin{aligned}
{T_{1}} & =\frac{1}{2}\left({{\theta^{2}}-\theta}\right), & {T_{2}} & =\frac{1}{2}\left({{\theta^{2}}+\theta}\right), & {T_{3}} & =1-{\theta^{2}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-69}
\end{aligned}$$ In this case, the time derivatives of the test function
and trial functions are given by following expressions.

$$\frac{{d{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}=\frac{2}{{\Delta{t_{n}}}}\left\{ {\frac{1}{2}\left({2\theta-1}\right)u_{1}^{(n)}+\frac{1}{2}\left({2\theta+1}\right)u_{2}^{(n)}-2\theta u_{3}^{(n)}}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-70}$$

$$\frac{{{d^{2}}{u^{h}}}}{{d{t^{2}}}}=\frac{4}{{\Delta t_{n}^{2}}}\left\{ {u_{1}^{(n)}+u_{2}^{(n)}-2u_{3}^{(n)}}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-71}$$

$$\frac{{d\delta{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}=\frac{2}{{\Delta{t_{n}}}}\left\{ {\frac{1}{2}\left({2\theta-1}\right)\delta u_{1}^{(n)}+\frac{1}{2}\left({2\theta+1}\right)\delta u_{2}^{(n)}-2\theta\delta u_{3}^{(n)}}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-72}$$

$$\frac{{d{u^{h}}\left({{t_{n}}}\right)}}{{dt}}=\frac{2}{{\Delta{t_{n}}}}\left\{ {-\frac{3}{2}u_{1}^{(n)}-\frac{1}{2}u_{2}^{(n)}+2u_{3}^{(n)}}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-73}$$

$$\frac{{d\delta{u^{h}}\left({{t_{n}}}\right)}}{{dt}}=\frac{2}{{\Delta{t_{n}}}}\left\{ {-\frac{3}{2}\delta u_{1}^{(n)}-\frac{1}{2}\delta u_{2}^{(n)}+2\delta u_{3}^{(n)}}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-74}$$

Subsequently, using the above expressions in the u-TDG/FEM weak-form
following system of linear equation can be obtained.
$$\begin{split}\frac{1}{{\Delta t_{n}^{2}}}\left[\begin{array}{ccc}
5 & {-1} & {-4}\\
7 & 5 & {-12}\\
{-12} & {-4} & {16}
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{1}^{(n)}}\\
{u_{2}^{(n)}}\\
{u_{3}^{(n)}}
\end{array}\right\} +\frac{{2\zeta{\omega_{n}}}}{{3\Delta{t_{n}}}}\left[\begin{array}{ccc}
7 & 1 & {-8}\\
1 & 7 & {-8}\\
{-8} & {-8} & {16}
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{1}^{(n)}}\\
{u_{2}^{(n)}}\\
{u_{3}^{(n)}}
\end{array}\right\} \\
+\frac{{\omega_{n}^{2}}}{6}\left[\begin{array}{ccc}
3 & 1 & {-4}\\
{-1} & 3 & 4\\
4 & {-4} & 0
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{1}^{(n)}}\\
{u_{2}^{(n)}}\\
{u_{3}^{(n)}}
\end{array}\right\} =\frac{1}{{\Delta{t_{n}}}}\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{-3v_{n}^{-}}\\
{-v_{n}^{-}}\\
{4v_{n}^{-}}
\end{array}\right\} +\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{\omega_{n}^{2}u_{n}^{-}}\\
0\\
0
\end{array}\right\} +\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{J_{ext}^{1}}\\
{J_{ext}^{2}}\\
{J_{ext}^{3}}
\end{array}\right\} 
\end{split}
\label{eq:ch3-eq-75}$$ where $u_{1}^{(n)}:=u_{n}^{+}$,
$u_{2}^{(n)}:=u_{n+1}^{-}$, and
$$\begin{split}J_{ext}^{1}=\int_{-1}^{+1}{\left({\frac{{2\theta-1}}{2}}\right)f(t)d\theta}\\
J_{ext}^{2}=\int_{-1}^{+1}{\left({\frac{{2\theta+1}}{2}}\right)f(t)d\theta}\\
J_{ext}^{3}=\int_{-1}^{+1}{\left({-2\theta}\right)f(t)d\theta}
\end{split}
\label{eq:ch3-eq-76}$$

::: remark
*Remark 7*. In the case of u-TDG/FEM, the order of interpolation for the
displacement should be at-least two (i.e., $p=2$). This requirement is
due to the presence of second order time derivative in the weak-form
(see Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-63\]](#eq:ch3-eq-63){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-63"}).
:::

::: remark
*Remark 8*. In case of quadratic interpolation, there are total three
unknowns, $u_{a}^{(n)}$ for $a=1,2,3$, to be determined in each
time-slab $I_{n}$. Besides, the number of unknowns in case of the
u-TDG/FEM is less than that of uv-TDG/FEM.
:::

## Velocity based single-field TDG/FEM

From the displacement based single-field TDG/FEM it follows that the
number of unknowns may be decreased by explicitly satisfying the
displacement-velocity compatibility condition (cf. Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-47\]](#eq:ch3-eq-47){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-47"}). In the u-TDG/FEM, however, the requirement
of at-least quadratic time interpolation of the displacement implies
that minimum three unknowns should be determined for each time-slab
$I_{n}$. One of the objectives of this thesis is to further decrease the
number of unknowns in a given time-slab. To achieve this goal a velocity
based single-field TDG/FEM (henceforth, v-TDG/FEM) is developed.

The key idea behind the v-TDG/FEM is to treat the velocity as the only
primary unknown. In $I_{n}$, the velocity is interpolated using the
Lagrange polynomials of degree $p$; the velocity remains continuous in
$I_{n}$, but discontinuity occurs at the end-points $t_{n},t_{n+1}$.
Further, a consistent time-integration of the velocity is performed as
post-processing step to compute the displacement. Thus, the
displacement-velocity compatibility relationship is naturally satisfied,
and Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-47\]](#eq:ch3-eq-47){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-47"} is no longer required to be solved. Regarding
the v-TDG/FEM, it is worth mentioning that the displacement remains
continuous throughout the time domain $\left[0,T\right]$, whereas in the
uv-TDG/FEM and u-TDG/FEM displacement is discontinuous at the discrete
times $\left\{ t_{0},t_{1},\cdots,t_{N}\right\}$.

The weak form of the v-TDG/FEM, which is described below (see Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-77\]](#eq:ch3-eq-77){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-77"}), is obtained by considering the first order
ODE given by Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-46\]](#eq:ch3-eq-46){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-46"}.

::: weakform
*Weak-form 3*. Find $v^{h}\in\Im_{l}^{h}$ such that for all
$\delta v^{h}\in\Im_{l}^{h}$, and for all $n=0,\cdots,N-1$
 Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-77\]](#eq:ch3-eq-77){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-77"}  holds.
$$\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{v^{h}}\left({\frac{{d{v^{h}}}}{{dt}}+2\zeta{\omega_{n}}{v^{h}}+\omega_{n}^{2}{u^{h}}-f(t)}\right)dt}+\delta{v^{h}}({t_{n}}){\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{v^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}}=0\label{eq:ch3-eq-77}$$
:::

In the above weak-form displacement is computed by using the following
relationship.
$${u^{h}}(t)=u({t_{n}})+\int_{{t_{n}}}^{t}{{v^{h}}(\tau)d\tau}\label{eq:ch3-eq-78}$$

Similar to the previous sections, discretization of the v-TDG/FEM
weak-form can be performed by employing the locally defined $p$-order
test and trial functions for the velocity.

$$\begin{aligned}
{v^{h}} & =\sum\limits_{a=1}^{p+1}{T_{a}^{(p)}v_{a}^{(n)}} & \delta{v^{h}} & =\sum\limits_{a=1}^{p+1}{T_{a}^{(p)}\delta v_{a}^{(n)}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-79}
\end{aligned}$$ where $T_{a}^{(p)}$ are the $p$-order Lagrange
polynomials (see Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-16\]](#eq:ch3-eq-16){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-16"}), and $v_{1}^{(n)}=v_{n}^{+}$,
$v_{2}^{(n)}=v_{n+1}^{-}$.

Consequently, the discrete form of the displacement-velocity
compatibility relationship, which is described below, can be obtained by
using the above-mentioned trial functions for the velocity in the Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-78\]](#eq:ch3-eq-78){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-78"}.
$$u^{h}(t)=u^{h}({t_{n}})+\sum\limits_{a=1}^{p+1}{\tilde{T}_{a}^{(p)}v_{a}^{(n)}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-80}$$
where
$$\tilde{T}_{a}^{(p)}=\frac{{\Delta{t_{n}}}}{2}\int_{-1}^{+1}{T_{a}^{(p)}d\theta}\label{eq:ch3-eq-81}$$
are $p+1$ order locally defined polynomials.

::: remark
*Remark 9*. In Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-80\]](#eq:ch3-eq-80){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-80"}, by the virtue of time integration of the
$p$-order Lagrange polynomials, the displacement are described by the
$p+1$-order local piecewise polynomials. In addition,
 Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-80\]](#eq:ch3-eq-80){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-80"}  is equivalent to the following form.
$${u^{h}}(t)=\sum\limits_{a=1}^{p+2}{T_{a}^{(p+1)}u_{a}^{(n)}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-82}$$
where ${T_{a}^{(p+1)}}$ are the $p+1$ order Lagrange polynomials given
by Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-16\]](#eq:ch3-eq-16){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-16"}. Besides, $u_{1}^{(n)}=u_{n}$ and
$u_{2}^{(n)}=u_{n+1}$ are the continuous value of the displacement at
time $t_{n}$ and $t_{n+1}$, respectively.
:::

After using Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-79\]](#eq:ch3-eq-79){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-79"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-80\]](#eq:ch3-eq-80){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-80"} in the v-TDG/FEM weak-form described by Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-77\]](#eq:ch3-eq-77){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-77"} one can obtain the following discrete form.
$$\begin{split}\delta v_{a}^{(n)}\left[{\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}\frac{{dT_{b}^{(p)}}}{{dt}}dt}+{\delta_{1a}}{\delta_{1b}}}\right]v_{b}^{(n)}+\delta v_{a}^{(n)}\left[{2\zeta{\omega_{n}}\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}T_{b}^{(p)}dt}}\right]v_{b}^{(n)}\\
+\delta v_{a}^{(n)}\left[{\omega_{n}^{2}\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}\tilde{T}_{b}^{(p)}dt}}\right]v_{b}^{(n)}+\delta v_{a}^{(n)}\left\{ {\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}dt}}\right\} \omega_{n}^{2}{u_{n}}\\
-\delta v_{a}^{(n)}\left\{ {\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}f(t)dt}}\right\} -\delta v_{a}^{(n)}\left\{ {{\delta_{1a}}v_{n}^{-}}\right\} =0
\end{split}
\label{eq:ch3-eq-83}$$

Subsequently, using the fact that Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-83\]](#eq:ch3-eq-83){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-83"} is true for all $\delta v_{a}^{(n)}$ following
system $p+1$ algebraic equations in $p+1$ unknowns can be obtained.
$${\left[m\right]^{ab}}v_{b}^{(n)}+2\zeta{\omega_{n}}{\left[c\right]^{ab}}v_{b}^{(n)}+\omega_{n}^{2}{\left[k\right]^{ab}}v_{b}^{(n)}={\left\{ {{J_{ext}}}\right\} ^{a}}-{\left\{ {J_{0}^{u}}\right\} ^{a}}+{\left\{ {J_{0}^{v}}\right\} ^{a}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-84}$$
The matrix-vector form of above equation is described by
$$\left[{\mathbf{m}}\right]\left\{ {{\mathbf{\tilde{v}}}}\right\} +2\zeta{\omega_{n}}\left[{\mathbf{c}}\right]\left\{ {{\mathbf{\tilde{v}}}}\right\} +\omega_{n}^{2}\left[{\mathbf{k}}\right]\left\{ {{\mathbf{\tilde{v}}}}\right\} =\left\{ {{{\mathbf{J}}_{ext}}}\right\} -\left\{ {{\mathbf{J}}_{0}^{u}}\right\} +\left\{ {{\mathbf{J}}_{0}^{v}}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-85}$$
where the matrices $\left[{\mathbf{m}}\right]$,
$\left[{\mathbf{c}}\right]$, and the vector
$\left\{ {{{\mathbf{J}}_{ext}}}\right\}$ are given by Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-24\]](#eq:ch3-eq-24){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-24"}, Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-25\]](#eq:ch3-eq-25){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-25"}, and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-27\]](#eq:ch3-eq-27){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-27"}, respectively. The expression for the
$\left[{\mathbf{k}}\right]$ matrix is given below.
$$\left[{\mathbf{k}}\right]:={\left[k\right]^{ab}}=\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}\tilde{T}_{b}^{(p)}dt}\label{eq:ch3-eq-86}$$

Furthermore, in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-85\]](#eq:ch3-eq-85){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-85"}, the element vectors,
$\left\{ {{\mathbf{J}}_{0}^{v}}\right\}$ and
$\left\{ {{\mathbf{J}}_{0}^{u}}\right\}$ correspond to the initial value
of velocity $(v_{n}^{-})$ and displacement $(u_{n})$, respectively. The
expressions for these vectors are presented as follows.
$$\left\{ {{\mathbf{J}}_{0}^{v}}\right\} :={\left\{ {J_{0}^{v}}\right\} ^{a}}={\delta_{1a}}v_{n}^{-}\label{eq:ch3-eq-87}$$
$$\left\{ {{\mathbf{J}}_{0}^{u}}\right\} :={\left\{ {J_{0}^{u}}\right\} ^{a}}=\omega_{n}^{2}{u_{n}}\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{T_{a}^{(p)}dt}\label{eq:ch3-eq-88}$$

Let us now consider the special case when velocity is linearly
interpolated in time by using the trial functions of the form
$${v^{h}}(t)={T_{1}}v_{n}^{+}+{T_{2}}v_{n+1}^{-}\label{eq:ch3-eq-89}$$
where $T_{1}$ and $T_{2}$ are linear shape functions which are given in
Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-28\]](#eq:ch3-eq-28){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-28"}. Accordingly, Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-80\]](#eq:ch3-eq-80){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-80"} transforms into
$${u^{h}}(t)={u_{n}}+v_{n}^{+}{{\tilde{T}}_{1}}+v_{n+1}^{-}{{\tilde{T}}_{2}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-90}$$
in which, $$\begin{aligned}
{{\tilde{T}}_{1}} & =\frac{\Delta t_{n}}{2}(1-T_{1}^{2}), & {{\tilde{T}}_{2}} & =\frac{\Delta t_{n}}{2}T_{2}^{2}\label{eq:ch3-eq-91}
\end{aligned}$$ are the quadratic polynomials. Accordingly, Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-85\]](#eq:ch3-eq-85){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-85"} now reads,
$$\begin{split}\frac{1}{2}\left[\begin{array}{cc}
1 & 1\\
{-1} & 1
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{v_{n}^{-}}\\
{v_{n+1}^{+}}
\end{array}\right\} +\frac{2\zeta{\omega_{n}}\Delta{t_{n}}}{6}\left[\begin{array}{cc}
2 & 1\\
1 & 2
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{v_{n}^{-}}\\
{v_{n+1}^{+}}
\end{array}\right\} \\
+\frac{{\omega_{n}^{2}\Delta t_{n}^{2}}}{{24}}\left[\begin{array}{cc}
3 & 1\\
5 & 3
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{v_{n}^{-}}\\
{v_{n+1}^{+}}
\end{array}\right\} =\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{J_{ext}^{1}}\\
{J_{ext}^{2}}
\end{array}\right\} -\frac{\omega_{n}^{2}\Delta{t_{n}}{u_{n}}}{2}\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
1\\
1
\end{array}\right\} +\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{v_{n}^{-}}\\
0
\end{array}\right\} 
\end{split}
\label{eq:ch3-eq-92}$$

# Numerical analysis of the TDG/FEM for the second order ODE {#sec:ch3-sec4}

In this section, numerical analysis of the TDG/FEM schemes, viz.
uv-TDG/FEM, u-TDG/FEM, and v-TDG/FEM, for the second order ODE in time
will be performed. To assess the stability characteristics and temporal
accuracy of the TDG/FEM schemes classical finite difference techniques
will be used [@Hughes2012 Chapter 9]. In this context, it is sufficient
to consider the following homogeneous and undamped form of Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-44\]](#eq:ch3-eq-44){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-44"}: $$\begin{aligned}
\frac{{{d^{2}}u}}{{d{t^{2}}}}+\omega_{n}^{2}u & =0, & u(0) & =u_{(}0), & \frac{du(0)}{dt} & =v_{0}, & t\in\left[0,T\right]\label{eq:ch3-eq-93}
\end{aligned}$$

## Total energy decay characteristics of TDG/FEM

TDG/FEM schemes can be classified as the true energy-decaying scheme.
The purpose of this section is to elucidate this concept. Let us return
to Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-93\]](#eq:ch3-eq-93){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-93"} which represent the governing equation of a
spring-mass system. Since the damping and external forces are absent in
such system, the total energy (kinetic energy plus potential energy) of
the system remains constant. [^8]

$${T_{E}}\left({u,v}\right):=\frac{1}{2}{v^{2}}+\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}{u^{2}}={\text{constant}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-94}$$
where the first term denotes the kinetic energy per unit mass, and
second term denotes the potential energy per unit mass. In addition
$\omega_{n}^{2}=k/m$ (see also Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-45\]](#eq:ch3-eq-45){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-45"}).

Consider the time domain $\left[0,T\right]$ and corresponding $N$
time-slabs; $I_{n}:=(t_{n},t_{n+1})$ for $n=0,1\cdots,N-1$. Let the
displacement and velocity at time $t_{0}=0$ be given by
$$u_{0}^{+}=u_{0}^{-}=u_{0},$$ and $$v_{0}^{+}=v_{0}^{-}=v_{0},$$
respectively. Furthermore, the displacement and velocity at time
$t_{N}=T$ be denoted by $u_{N}^{-}$ and $u_{N}^{-}$, respectively.

::: proposition
*Proposition 1*. The uv-TDG/FEM is an energy decaying time integration
algorithm, in which the total energy at the end of time interval,
$T_{E}{(u_{N}^{-},v_{N}^{-})}$, is always bounded from above by the
total energy at the beginning of the time interval (i.e.,
$T_{E}{(u_{0},v_{0})}$).
$$T_{E}{(u_{N}^{-},v_{N}^{-})}\le T_{E}{(u_{0},v_{0})}\label{eq:ch3-eq-95}$$
:::

::: proof
*Proof.* To prove the above proposition (Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-95\]](#eq:ch3-eq-95){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-95"}) use $\delta v^{h}=v^{h}$ and
$\delta u^{h}=\omega_{n}^{2}u^{h}$ in the uv-TDG/FEM weak-form, which is
given by Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-49\]](#eq:ch3-eq-49){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-49"}, with $\zeta=0$ and $f=0$.

$$\begin{split}\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{{v^{h}}\frac{{d{v^{h}}}}{{dt}}dt}+\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{{v^{h}}\omega_{n}^{2}{u^{h}}dt}+v_{n}^{+}\left({v_{n}^{+}-v_{n}^{-}}\right)+\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\omega_{n}^{2}{u^{h}}\frac{{d{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}dt}\\
-\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\omega_{n}^{2}{u^{h}}{v^{h}}dt}+\omega_{n}^{2}u_{n}^{+}\left({u_{n}^{+}-u_{n}^{-}}\right)=0
\end{split}$$
$$\begin{split} & \Rightarrow\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\frac{d}{{dt}}\left[{\frac{1}{2}{{\left({{v^{h}}}\right)}^{2}}+\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}{{\left({{u^{h}}}\right)}^{2}}}\right]dt}+{\left({v_{n}^{+}}\right)^{2}}-v_{n}^{+}v_{n}^{-}+\omega_{n}^{2}{\left({u_{n}^{+}}\right)^{2}}-\omega_{n}^{2}u_{n}^{+}u_{n}^{-}=0\\
 & \Rightarrow\frac{1}{2}{\left({v_{n+1}^{-}}\right)^{2}}+\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}{\left({u_{n+1}^{-}}\right)^{2}}+\frac{1}{2}{\left({v_{n}^{+}}\right)^{2}}+\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}{\left({u_{n}^{+}}\right)^{2}}-v_{n}^{+}v_{n}^{-}-\omega_{n}^{2}u_{n}^{+}u_{n}^{-}=0\\
 & \Rightarrow\frac{1}{2}\sum\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{\left[{{{\left({v_{n+1}^{-}}\right)}^{2}}+{{\left({v_{n}^{+}}\right)}^{2}}-2v_{n}^{+}v_{n}^{-}}\right]}+\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}\sum\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{\left[{{{\left({u_{n+1}^{-}}\right)}^{2}}+{{\left({u_{n}^{+}}\right)}^{2}}-2u_{n}^{+}u_{n}^{-}}\right]}=0\\
 & \Rightarrow\frac{1}{2}\sum\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{\left[{{{\left({v_{n}^{-}}\right)}^{2}}+{{\left({v_{n}^{+}}\right)}^{2}}-2v_{n}^{+}v_{n}^{-}}\right]}+\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}\sum\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{\left[{{{\left({u_{n}^{-}}\right)}^{2}}+{{\left({u_{n}^{+}}\right)}^{2}}-2u_{n}^{+}u_{n}^{-}}\right]}\\
 & \quad+\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}{\left({u_{N}^{-}}\right)^{2}}+\frac{1}{2}{\left({v_{N}^{-}}\right)^{2}}-\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}{\left({{u_{0}}}\right)^{2}}-\frac{1}{2}{\left({{v_{0}}}\right)^{2}}=0\\
 & \Rightarrow\frac{1}{2}\sum\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{v^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}^{2}}+\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}\sum\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{u^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}^{2}}+{T_{E}}\left({u_{N}^{-},v_{N}^{-}}\right)-{T_{E}}\left({{u_{0}},{v_{0}}}\right)=0\\
 & \Rightarrow{T_{E}}\left({u_{N}^{-},v_{N}^{-}}\right)={T_{E}}\left({{u_{0}},{v_{0}}}\right)-\frac{1}{2}\sum\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{v^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}^{2}}-\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}\sum\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{u^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}^{2}}\\
 & \Rightarrow{T_{E}}\left({u_{N}^{-},v_{N}^{-}}\right)\leqslant{T_{E}}\left({{u_{0}},{v_{0}}}\right)
\end{split}$$ ◻
:::

The last step in above proof follows from the fact that
$$\frac{1}{2}\sum\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{v^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}^{2}}+\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}\sum\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{u^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}^{2}}\geqslant0\label{eq:ch3-eq-96}$$
where the first term on the left hand side represents the kinetic energy
per unit mass due to the discontinuity jump in the velocity, and the
second term on the left hand side denotes the potential energy per unit
mass due to the discontinuity jump in the displacement.

::: proposition
*Proposition 2*. The u-TDG/FEM is an energy decaying time integration
algorithm with $$T_{E}(u_{N}^{-},v_{N}^{-})\le T_{E}(u_{0},v_{0})$$
:::

::: proof
*Proof.* To prove the above proposition take $\delta u^{h}=u^{h}$ and
$$v^{h}=\frac{du^{h}}{dt}$$ in the u-TDG/FEM weak-form, which is give by
Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-63\]](#eq:ch3-eq-63){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-63"}, with $\zeta=0$, and $f=0$.

$$\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{{v^{h}}\frac{{d{v^{h}}}}{{dt}}dt}+\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\omega_{n}^{2}{u^{h}}\frac{{d{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}dt}+v_{n}^{+}\left({v_{n}^{+}-v_{n}^{-}}\right)+\omega_{n}^{2}u_{n}^{+}\left({u_{n}^{+}-u_{n}^{-}}\right)=0$$
Noting that the above equation is identical to Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-96\]](#eq:ch3-eq-96){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-96"} completes the proof. ◻
:::

::: proposition
*Proposition 3*. The v-TDG/FEM is an energy decaying time integration
algorithm with $$T_{E}(u_{N},v_{N}^{-})\le T_{E}(u_{0},v_{0})$$
:::

::: proof
*Proof.* To prove the above proposition consider $\delta v^{h}=v^{h}$
and $$v^{h}=\frac{du^{h}}{dt}$$ in the v-TDG/FEM weak-form, which is
given by Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-77\]](#eq:ch3-eq-77){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-77"}, with $\zeta=0$ and $f=0$.

$$\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{{v^{h}}\frac{{d{v^{h}}}}{{dt}}dt}++\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\omega_{n}^{2}{u^{h}}\frac{{d{u^{h}}}}{{dt}}dt}+{\left({v_{n}^{+}}\right)^{2}}-v_{n}^{+}v_{n}^{-}=0$$

$$\begin{split} & \Rightarrow\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\frac{d}{{dt}}\left[{\frac{1}{2}{{\left({{v^{h}}}\right)}^{2}}+\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}{{\left({{u^{h}}}\right)}^{2}}}\right]dt}+{\left({v_{n}^{+}}\right)^{2}}-v_{n}^{+}v_{n}^{-}=0\\
 & \Rightarrow\frac{1}{2}{\left({v_{n+1}^{-}}\right)^{2}}-\frac{1}{2}{\left({v_{n}^{+}}\right)^{2}}+\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}{\left({{u_{n+1}}}\right)^{2}}-\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}{\left({{u_{n}}}\right)^{2}}+{\left({v_{n}^{+}}\right)^{2}}-v_{n}^{+}v_{n}^{-}=0\\
 & \Rightarrow\frac{1}{2}\sum\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{\left[{{{\left({v_{n+1}^{-}}\right)}^{2}}+{{\left({v_{n}^{+}}\right)}^{2}}-2v_{n}^{+}v_{n}^{-}}\right]}+\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}\sum\limits_{}^ {}{\left[{{{\left({{u_{n+1}}}\right)}^{2}}-{{\left({{u_{n}}}\right)}^{2}}}\right]}=0\\
 & \Rightarrow\frac{1}{2}\sum\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{v^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}^{2}}+\frac{1}{2}{\left({v_{N}^{-}}\right)^{2}}-\frac{1}{2}{\left({{v_{0}}}\right)^{2}}+\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}{\left({{u_{N}}}\right)^{2}}-\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}{\left({{u_{0}}}\right)^{2}}=0\\
 & \Rightarrow{T_{E}}\left({{u_{N}},v_{N}^{-}}\right)={T_{E}}\left({{u_{0}},{v_{0}}}\right)-\frac{1}{2}\sum\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{v^{h}}}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}^{2}}\\
 & \Rightarrow{T_{E}}\left({{u_{N}},v_{N}^{-}}\right)\leqslant{T_{E}}\left({{u_{0}},{v_{0}}}\right)
\end{split}$$ ◻
:::

To assess the energy dissipation characteristics of the
time-discontinuous Galerkin schemes, the spring-mass problem (see Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-93\]](#eq:ch3-eq-93){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-93"}) is solved by using the TDG/FEMs with
$\omega_{n}=2\pi$, $u_{0}=0$, and $v_{0}=1.0m/s$. The undamped time
period $T_{0}$ of the sinusoidal motion is $1.0$ second, and the total
time duration is taken as $T=50$ seconds. Fig.
[7](#fig:ch3-fig-6){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-6"}
plots the time history graphs of the normalized total energy [^9]
computed by using the TDG schemes with different time-step sizes. As
anticipated, the energy dissipation in the case of uv-TDG/FEM is
relatively higher than the other two schemes. In addition, the energy
decay characteristics of the u-TDG/FEM and v-TDG/FEM are identical to
each other. Furthermore, the dissipation of energy decreases as the
time-step size decreases (see also Fig.
[6](#fig:ch3-fig-7){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-7"})
which indicates that the jump discontinuity in time decreases with
time-step size. In fact, the subsequent sections will demonstrate that
the jump discontinuity in time decreases with time-step size.

![Spring-mass system -- Time history of the normalized total energy
obtained by using the v-TDG/FEM.](figures/ch3-fig-7){#fig:ch3-fig-7}

![Spring-mass system -- Time history graphs of the normalized total
energy obtained by using different TDG
schemes.](figures/ch3-fig-6){#fig:ch3-fig-6 width="100%"}

The effect of energy-dissipation can be visualized from the
displacement-velocity phase diagram. For the present problem, the
displacement-velocity relationship can be obtained by using the fact
that the total energy of the spring-mass sysmstem is conserved.
$$\frac{1}{2}v^{2}+\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}u^{2}=T_{E0}$$ In the $u-v$
coordinate plane this equation represents an ellipse. The presence of
energy dissipation in the numerical algorithm, however, decreases the
total energy which in the turn decreases the radii of the ellipse. The
phase diagrams for uv-TDG/FEM, u-TDG/FEM, and v-TDG/FEM are given in
Fig. [8](#fig:ch3-fig-8){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-8"}, Fig.
[9](#fig:ch3-fig-9){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-9"}, and
Fig. [10](#fig:ch3-fig-10){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-10"}, respectively.

![Spring-mass system -- Phase diagram obtained by using the uv-TDG/FEM
with different time-step size.](figures/h3-fig-8){#fig:ch3-fig-8
width="100%"}

![Spring-mass system -- Phase diagram obtained by using the u-TDG/FEM
with different time-step size.](figures/ch3-fig-9){#fig:ch3-fig-9
width="100%"}

![Spring-mass system -- Phase diagram obtained by using the v-TDG/FEM
with different time-step size.](figures/ch3-fig-10){#fig:ch3-fig-10
width="100%"}

## Stability of TDG/FEM

To solve Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-93\]](#eq:ch3-eq-93){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-93"} by using the uv-TDG/FEM first order test and
trial functions for both displacement and velocity have been used. In
this way, the matrix-vector form, which is described below, can be
obtained by setting $\zeta=0$ and $f(t)=0$ in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-61\]](#eq:ch3-eq-61){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-61"}. $$\frac{1}{2}\left[\begin{array}{cc}
1 & 1\\
{-1} & 1
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{v_{n}^{+}\Delta{t_{n}}}\\
{v_{n+1}^{-}\Delta{t_{n}}}
\end{array}\right\} +\frac{{{\Omega^{2}}}}{6}\left[\begin{array}{cc}
2 & 1\\
1 & 2
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{n}^{+}}\\
{u_{n+1}^{-}}
\end{array}\right\} =\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{v_{n}^{-}\Delta{t_{n}}}\\
0
\end{array}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-97}$$
$$\frac{1}{2}\left[\begin{array}{cc}
1 & 1\\
{-1} & 1
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{n}^{+}}\\
{u_{n+1}^{-}}
\end{array}\right\} -\frac{1}{6}\left[\begin{array}{cc}
2 & 1\\
1 & 2
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{v_{n}^{+}\Delta{t_{n}}}\\
{v_{n+1}^{-}\Delta{t_{n}}}
\end{array}\right\} =\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{n}^{-}}\\
0
\end{array}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-98}$$

By eliminating $v_{n}^{+}$ and $u_{n}^{+}$ from Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-97\]](#eq:ch3-eq-97){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-97"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-98\]](#eq:ch3-eq-98){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-98"}, two linear equations in $v_{n+1}^{-}$ and
$u_{n+1}^{-}$ can be obtained. These equations are described by the
following compact form. $$\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{n+1}^{-}}\\
{v_{n+1}^{-}\Delta{t_{n}}}
\end{array}\right\} ={\mathbf{A}}\left(\Omega\right)\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{n}^{-}}\\
{v_{n}^{-}\Delta{t_{n}}}
\end{array}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-99}$$

In above equation,
${\mathbf{A}}\left(\Omega\right)\in\mathbb{R}^{2\times2}$ is called the
amplification matrix, and it depends upon
$\Omega=\omega_{n}\Delta t_{n}$ (see Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-100\]](#eq:ch3-eq-100){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-100"}).

$${\mathbf{A}}\left(\Omega\right)=\left[\begin{array}{cc}
{\frac{{-14{\Omega^{2}}+36}}{{{\Omega^{4}}+4{\Omega^{2}}+36}}} & {\frac{{-2{\Omega^{2}}+36}}{{{\Omega^{4}}+4{\Omega^{2}}+36}}}\\
{\frac{{2{\Omega^{4}}-36{\Omega^{2}}}}{{{\Omega^{4}}+4{\Omega^{2}}+36}}} & {\frac{{-14{\Omega^{2}}+36}}{{{\Omega^{4}}+4{\Omega^{2}}+36}}}
\end{array}\right]\label{eq:ch3-eq-100}$$

Further, to solve Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-93\]](#eq:ch3-eq-93){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-93"} by using the u-TDG/FEM quadratic test and
trial functions for the displacement have been used. In this way, the
matrix-vector form, which is described below, can be obtained by setting
$\zeta=0$ and $f(t)=0$ in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-75\]](#eq:ch3-eq-75){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-75"}. $$\begin{split}\left[\begin{array}{ccc}
5 & {-1} & {-4}\\
7 & 5 & {-12}\\
{-12} & {-4} & {16}
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{1}^{(n)}}\\
{u_{2}^{(n)}}\\
{u_{3}^{(n)}}
\end{array}\right\} +\frac{{{\Omega^{2}}}}{6}\left[\begin{array}{ccc}
3 & 1 & {-4}\\
{-1} & 3 & 4\\
4 & {-4} & 0
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{1}^{(n)}}\\
{u_{2}^{(n)}}\\
{u_{3}^{(n)}}
\end{array}\right\} \\
=\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{-3v_{n}^{-}\Delta{t_{n}}}\\
{-v_{n}^{-}\Delta{t_{n}}}\\
{4v_{n}^{-}\Delta{t_{n}}}
\end{array}\right\} +\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{{\Omega^{2}}u_{n}^{-}}\\
0\\
0
\end{array}\right\} 
\end{split}
\label{eq:ch3-eq-101}$$ Once again, it will be advantageous to recast
the above system in the form given by Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-99\]](#eq:ch3-eq-99){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-99"}. In the case of v-TDG/FEM the amplification
matrix is given by Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-102\]](#eq:ch3-eq-102){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-102"}
$${\mathbf{A}}\left(\Omega\right)=\left[\begin{array}{cc}
{\frac{{{\Omega^{4}}-30{\Omega^{2}}+72}}{{{\Omega^{4}}+6{\Omega^{2}}+72}}} & {\frac{{-6{\Omega^{2}}+72}}{{{\Omega^{4}}+6{\Omega^{2}}+72}}}\\
{\frac{{6{\Omega^{4}}-72{x^{2}}}}{{{\Omega^{4}}+6{\Omega^{2}}+72}}} & {\frac{{-30{\Omega^{2}}+72}}{{{\Omega^{4}}+6{\Omega^{2}}+72}}}
\end{array}\right]\label{eq:ch3-eq-102}$$

Finally, to solve Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-93\]](#eq:ch3-eq-93){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-93"} by using the v-TDG/FEM linear test and trial
functions for the velocity have been used. In this way, the
matrix-vector form, which is described below, can be obtained by setting
$\zeta=0$ and $f(t)=0$ in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-92\]](#eq:ch3-eq-92){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-92"}.
$$\begin{split}\frac{1}{2}\left[\begin{array}{cc}
1 & 1\\
{-1} & 1
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{v_{n}^{-}\Delta{t_{n}}}\\
{v_{n+1}^{+}\Delta{t_{n}}}
\end{array}\right\} +\frac{{{\Omega^{2}}}}{{24}}\left[\begin{array}{cc}
3 & 1\\
5 & 3
\end{array}\right]\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{v_{n}^{-}\Delta{t_{n}}}\\
{v_{n+1}^{+}\Delta{t_{n}}}
\end{array}\right\} \\
=\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{v_{n}^{-}\Delta{t_{n}}}\\
0
\end{array}\right\} -\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{\frac{{{\Omega^{2}}{u_{n}}}}{2}}\\
{\frac{{{\Omega^{2}}{u_{n}}}}{2}}
\end{array}\right\} 
\end{split}
\label{eq:ch3-eq-103}$$ By eliminating $v_{n}^{+}$ from Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-103\]](#eq:ch3-eq-103){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-103"} following system of two linear equations in
$v_{n+1}^{-}$ and $u_{n+1}$ can be obtained. $$\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{n+1}}\\
{v_{n+1}^{-}\Delta{t_{n}}}
\end{array}\right\} ={\mathbf{A}}\left(\Omega\right)\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
{u_{n}}\\
{v_{n}^{-}\Delta{t_{n}}}
\end{array}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-104}$$ In above equation the
amplification matrix is given by following expression.
$${\mathbf{A}}\left(\Omega\right)=\left[{\begin{array}{rc}
{\frac{{{\Omega^{4}}-30{\Omega^{2}}+72}}{{{\Omega^{4}}+6{\Omega^{2}}+72}}} & {\frac{{-6{\Omega^{2}}+72}}{{{\Omega^{4}}+6{\Omega^{2}}+72}}}\\
{\frac{{6{\Omega^{4}}-72{\Omega^{2}}}}{{{\Omega^{4}}+6{\Omega^{2}}+72}}} & {\frac{{-30{\Omega^{2}}+72}}{{{\Omega^{4}}+6{\Omega^{2}}+72}}}
\end{array}}\right]\label{eq:ch3-eq-105}$$

::: remark
*Remark 10*. It is worthwhile to mention that the amplification matrix
for the u-TDG/FEM and the v-TDG/FEM are identical (cf. Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-102\]](#eq:ch3-eq-102){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-102"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-105\]](#eq:ch3-eq-105){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-105"}). Therefore, the stability and accuracy
characteristics of these two methods will be identical, and henceforth
only the case of the v-TDG/FEM and uv-TDG/FEM will be discussed.
:::

The stability of the TDG schemes is determined by the spectral
properties of the amplification matrix. Let $\lambda_{1}(\mathbf{A})$
and $\lambda_{2}(\mathbf{A})$ be the eigenvalues of the amplification
matrix. Accordingly, it can be shown that
$$\lambda_{1,2}(\mathbf{A})=a_{1}\pm\sqrt{a_{1}^{2}-a_{2}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-106}$$
where $$\begin{aligned}
{a_{1}} & =\frac{1}{2}\left({{A_{11}}+{A_{22}}}\right), & {a_{2}} & ={A_{11}}{A_{22}}-{A_{12}}{A_{21}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-107}
\end{aligned}$$ The modulus of $\lambda_{i}(\mathbf{A})$ is given by
$$\left|{{\lambda_{i}}}\right|=\sqrt{{\lambda_{i}}{\lambda_{i}}^{*}}\quad\text{no sum for index i},$$
where ${{\lambda_{i}}^{*}}$ denotes the complex conjugate of
$\lambda_{i}$. Then the spectral radius of amplification matrix is
defined as
$$\rho\left({\mathbf{A}}\right)=\mathop{\max}\limits_{i=1,2}\left|{{\lambda_{i}}\left({\mathbf{A}}\right)}\right|\label{eq:ch3-eq-108}$$

::: {#tab:ch3-tab-1}
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|                      | uv-TDG/FEM           | v-TDG/FEM            |
+:=====================+:====================:+=====================:+
| ::: varwidth         | $\                   | $\frac{{{\Omega^{4   |
| \[12pt\]             | frac{{-14{\Omega^{2} | }}-60{\Omega^{2}}+14 |
|                      | }+36}}{{{\Omega^{4}} | 4}}{{2{\Omega^{4}}+1 |
| $a_{1}$              | +4{\Omega^{2}}+36}}$ | 2{\Omega^{2}}+144}}$ |
| :::                  |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| ::: varwidth         | $\frac{{4{\Omega^{2} | $\frac{{6{\Omega^{2} |
| \[12pt\]             | }+36}}{{{\Omega^{4}} | }+72}}{{{\Omega^{4}} |
|                      | +4{\Omega^{2}}+36}}$ | +6{\Omega^{2}}+72}}$ |
| $a_{2}$              |                      |                      |
| :::                  |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| ::: varwidth         | $1$                  | $1$                  |
| \[12pt\]             |                      |                      |
|                      |                      |                      |
| $\ma                 |                      |                      |
| thop{\lim}\limits_{\ |                      |                      |
| Omega\to0}\rho\left( |                      |                      |
| {\mathbf{A}}\right)$ |                      |                      |
| :::                  |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| ::: varwidth         | $0$                  | $1$                  |
| \[12pt\]             |                      |                      |
|                      |                      |                      |
| $\mathop{            |                      |                      |
| \lim}\limits_{\Omega |                      |                      |
| \to\infty}\rho\left( |                      |                      |
| {\mathbf{A}}\right)$ |                      |                      |
| :::                  |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \[12pt\]             |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

:  Amplification matrix parameters; $a_{1}$ and $a_{2}$ for the
uv-TDG/FEM and  v-TDG/FEM .
:::

Accordingly, for the spectral stability of the TDG/FEM following
conditions will be required [@Hughes2012 Chapter 9]

1.  $\rho{(A)}\le1$

2.  Eigenvalues of $\mathbf{A}$ of multiplicity greater than one are
    strictly less than one in modulus.

From Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-106\]](#eq:ch3-eq-106){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-106"}, Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-107\]](#eq:ch3-eq-107){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-107"}, and Table
[1](#tab:ch3-tab-1){reference-type="ref" reference="tab:ch3-tab-1"} it
is easy to demonstrate that both uv-TDG/FEM and v-TDG/FEM satisfy the
above-mentioned spectral stability conditions. Therefore, TDG/FEM
schemes are unconditionally stable time-marching schemes.

Alternatively, for a $2\times2$ amplification matrix, the spectral
stability can be examined by using the technique originally developed by
the Hilber [@Hughes1983 for derivation]. Hilber technique for the
stability of the algorithm is specified in terms of the invariants of
amplification matrix; $a_{1}$ and $a_{2}$. The stability region in
$a_{1}-a_{2}$ space satisfies (see also Fig.
[11](#fig:ch3-fig-11){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-11"})
$$-\frac{{\left({{a_{2}}+1}\right)}}{2}\leqslant{a_{1}}\leqslant\frac{{\left({{a_{2}}+1}\right)}}{2},\qquad-1\leqslant{a_{2}}<1\label{eq:ch3-eq-109}$$
$$-1<{a_{1}}<1,\qquad{a_{2}}=1\label{eq:ch3-eq-110}$$ Fig.
[11](#fig:ch3-fig-11){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-11"}a
and Fig. [11](#fig:ch3-fig-11){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-11"}b depict the stability region corresponding
to Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-109\]](#eq:ch3-eq-109){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-109"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-110\]](#eq:ch3-eq-110){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-110"}, respectively.

![ Spectral stability region for a $2\times2$ amplification matrix.
](figures/ch3-fig-11){#fig:ch3-fig-11 width="100%"}

![ $a_{1}$,$a_{2}$ trajectories for the uv-TDG/FEM and v-TDG/FEM.
](figures/ch3-fig-12){#fig:ch3-fig-12}

Lastly, the $a_{1}$, $a_{2}$ trajectories for the uv-TDG/FEM and
v-TDG/FEM are plotted in Fig. [12](#fig:ch3-fig-12){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-12"}. It can be observed that the $a_{1}$ and
$a_{2}$ for the TDG/FEM are located inside the Hilber stability region,
therefore, proving the unconditional stability of the uv-TDG/FEM and
v-TDG/FEM.

## High-frequency response of TDG/FEM

Spectral radius plots are useful to observe the dissipative properties
of an algorithm over the entire frequency domain [@Hulbert1992].
Moreover, High-frequency response of the spectral radius
$\rho(\mathbf{A})$ provides the informations regarding the numerical
stability and numerical dissipation of the spurious high-frequency
components @Hughes1983 [@Hughes2012]. Fig.
[13](#fig:ch3-fig-13){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-13"}a
depicts the frequency responses of the spectral radius for the
uv-TDG/FEM and v-TDG/FEM. Furthermore, in Fig.
[13](#fig:ch3-fig-13){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-13"}b
spectral radius of TDG schemes are plotted along with the semi-discrete
algorithms. [^10] Once again it can be observed that v-TDG/FEM and
uv-TDG/FEM are unconditionally stable algorithms as $\rho\le1$.

For uv-TDG/FEM, spectral radius in the high-frequency regime (i.e.,
${\rho_{\infty}}:=\mathop{\lim}\limits_{\Omega\to\infty}\rho$), reaches
to zero, consequently, the algorithm can dissipate the spurious
high-frequency response. The v-TDG/FEM, however, cannot attenuate such
spurious high-frequency contents since $\rho_{\infty}=1$ (see Fig.
[13](#fig:ch3-fig-13){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-13"}).
The spectral radius for the v-TDG/FEM is lower than that of uv-TDG/FEM,
therefore, the former has lower numerical dissipation than the latter.
Furthermore, in lower frequency regime the spectral radius for both TDG
schemes is close to one implying negligible attenuation of the small
frequency content. Lastly, the points $\Omega\approx\pi$ and
$\Omega\approx3.4\pi$, at which spectral radius for the v-TDG/FEM
attains its minimum value, mark the bifurcation of complex conjugate
eigenvalues into distinct real eigenvalues (see Fig.
[13](#fig:ch3-fig-13){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-13"}a).

![ Frequency response of spectral radius $\rho$: (a) uv-TDG/FEM and
v-TDG/FEM, and (b) comparison of spectral radii for TDG schemes with the
semi-discrete algorithms. ](figures/ch3-fig-13){#fig:ch3-fig-13
width="100%"}

## Accuracy of TDG/FEM

It can be shown that Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-99\]](#eq:ch3-eq-99){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-99"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-104\]](#eq:ch3-eq-104){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-104"} satisfy the finite difference stencile
described by Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-111\]](#eq:ch3-eq-111){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-111"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-112\]](#eq:ch3-eq-112){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-112"}, respectively. $$\begin{aligned}
u_{n+1}^{-}-2{a_{1}}u_{n}^{-}+{a_{2}}{u_{n-1}^{-}} & =0, & v_{n+1}^{-}-2{a_{1}}v_{n}^{-}+{a_{2}}{v_{n-1}^{-}} & =0\label{eq:ch3-eq-111}
\end{aligned}$$ $$\begin{aligned}
u_{n+1}-2{a_{1}}u_{n}+{a_{2}}{u_{n-1}} & =0, & v_{n+1}^{-}-2{a_{1}}v_{n}^{-}+{a_{2}}{v_{n-1}^{-}} & =0\label{eq:ch3-eq-112}
\end{aligned}$$

Let $u(t)$ and $v(t)$ be the exact solutions for the displacement and
velocity, respectively. Then the local truncation error $\tau(t)$
corresponding to
 Eq. ([\[eq:ch3-eq-111\]](#eq:ch3-eq-111){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-111"}a)  and
 Eq. ([\[eq:ch3-eq-112\]](#eq:ch3-eq-112){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-112"}a)  at any time $t$ becomes [@Hulbert1992]
$$u(t+\Delta t)-2{a_{1}}u(t)+{a_{2}}u(t-\Delta t)=\Delta{t^{2}}\tau\left(t\right)\label{eq:ch3-eq-113}$$
Subsequently, by expanding $u(t+\Delta t)$ and $u(t-\Delta t)$ about $t$
using the Taylor series, and then using Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-93\]](#eq:ch3-eq-93){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-93"} [^11], it can be shown that both uv-TDG/FEM
and v-TDG/FEM schemes are consistent, i.e.,
$$\left|{\tau\left(t\right)}\right|\leqslant c\Delta{t^{3}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-114}$$
with error coefficients $c=1/36$ and $c=1/72$ for the uv-TDG/FEM and the
v-TDG/FEM, respectively. Furthermore, Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-114\]](#eq:ch3-eq-114){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-114"} proves that both TDG schemes are third order
accurate in time.

Since uv-TDG/FEM and v-TDG/FEM are both consistent and stable one can
use the Lax equivalence theorem to prove the convergence of the
algorithms. A direct consequence of the convergence is that there exists
an $\Omega_{c}>0$ such that if $0<\Omega<\Omega_{c}$, then the
eigenvalues of amplification matrix are complex, i.e.,
$a_{1}^{2}-{a_{2}}<0$ in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-106\]](#eq:ch3-eq-106){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-106"}, and the solution of Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-93\]](#eq:ch3-eq-93){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-93"} can be written as follows [@Hughes1983]:
$${u_{n}}=\exp\left({-\frac{{\bar{\zeta}\,\bar{\Omega}{t_{n}}}}{{\Delta t}}}\right)\left[{{k_{1}}\cos\left({\frac{{\bar{\Omega}{t_{n}}}}{{\Delta t}}}\right)+{k_{2}}\sin\left({\frac{{\bar{\Omega}{t_{n}}}}{{\Delta t}}}\right)}\right]\label{eq:ch3-eq-115}$$
with
$$\bar{\Omega}=\arctan\left({\frac{{\sqrt{{a_{2}}-a_{1}^{2}}}}{{{a_{1}}}}}\right)\label{eq:ch3-eq-116}$$
$$\bar{\zeta}=-\frac{1}{{2\bar{\Omega}}}\ln\left({{a_{2}}}\right)\label{eq:ch3-eq-117}$$
here, $\bar{\zeta}$ denotes the algorithmic damping ratio,
$\bar{\Omega}$ is the frequency of the discrete solutions, and the
coefficients $k_{1}$ and $k_{2}$ are determined by the displacement and
velocity initial conditions. The relationship between the discrete
frequency $\bar{\Omega}$ and discrete time period $\bar{T}$ is given by
$$\frac{{\bar{\Omega}}}{{2\pi}}=\frac{{\Delta t}}{{\bar{T}}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-118}$$

![Illustration of the accuracy
measures](figures/ch3-fig-14){#fig:ch3-fig-14}

Further, the numerical accuracy of a time-integration algorithm is
usually measured in the lower frequency regime. Therefore, it is
appropriate to use the algorithmic damping ratio $\bar{\zeta}$ and the
relative frequency error $(\Omega-\bar{\Omega})/\bar{\Omega}$ as the
measures of numerical dissipation and dispersion, respectively.

Numerical dissipation is the measure of amplitude decay in each cycle,
while numerical dispersion measures the relative change in the time
period of the wave (see Fig. [14](#fig:ch3-fig-14){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-14"}). Thus, the numerical algorithms designed
for long-term dynamic simulations should have little numerical
dissipation and dispersion. Moreover, it is important to note that both
numerical dissipation and dispersion are computed from complex
eigenvalues $\lambda_{1,2}(\mathbf{(}A))$, thus, they are meaningful for
the small frequency range of $0<\Omega<\Omega_{c}$.

The behavior of relative frequency error for the uv-TDG/FEM, v-TDG/FEM
and semi-discrete algorithms in low frequency domain is presented in
Fig. [15](#fig:ch3-fig-15){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-15"}. It is remarkable that the TDG schemes have
very less relative frequency error compare to the semi-discrete
algorithms which can be attributed to the third order accuracy of these
schemes. Furthermore, relative frequency error for the v-TDG/FEM is
significantly smaller than the error in uv-TDG/FEM.

![Relative frequency error in the low frequency domain: (a) uv-TDG/FEM
and v-TDG/FEM, and (b) comparison of the relative frequency error for
the TDG schemes with the semi-discrete
algorithms.](figures/ch3-fig-15){#fig:ch3-fig-15 width="100%"}

Fig. [16](#fig:ch3-fig-16){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-16"} depicts the behavior of algorithm damping
ratio for the uv-TDG/FEM, v-TDG/FEM and semi-discrete algorithms. The
algorithmic damping for v-TDG/FEM is comparable with the HHT-$\alpha$
scheme, however, it is significantly smaller than the uv-TDG/FEM. It is
evident that the Houbolt and Wilson-$\theta$ methods are too dissipative
in the low-frequency range, therefore, these algorithms are not suitable
for the long-duration numerical simulations.

![Algorithmic damping ratio in the low frequency domain: (a) uv-TDG/FEM
and v-TDG/FEM, and (b) comparison of the algorithmic damping ratio for
the TDG schemes with the semi-discrete
algorithms.](figures/ch3-fig-16){#fig:ch3-fig-16 width="100%"}

::: remark
*Remark 11*. The characteristics of the proposed v-TDG/FEM, such as very
low numerical dispersion and dissipation, third-order accuracy, and
unconditional stability, make v-TDG/FEM scheme suitable for long-time
simulations. However, at present the only possible drawback to the
v-TDG/FEM is its incapability to attenuate the spurious high-frequency
components.
:::

# Continuum theory of elastodynamics {#sec:ch3-sec5}

Let $\Omega\subset\mathbb{R}^{n_{sd}}$ be an open and bounded region
occupied by an elastic body at time $t$, where $n_{sd}$ is the number of
spatial dimensions. The boundary of $\Omega$ is denoted by $\Gamma$. Let
$\bar{\Omega}=\Omega\cup\Gamma$ denote the closure of $\Omega$. Further,
let indices $i,j,k$ and $l$ take values from $1,\cdots,n_{sd}$, and the
Einstein summation convention applies to the repeated indices $i,j,k,$
and $l$ only. Furthermore, consider the nonoverlapping partitions,
$\Gamma_{i}^{g}$ and $\Gamma_{i}^{h}$, of the boundary $\Gamma$ such
that $$\begin{aligned}
\Gamma & =\Gamma_{i}^{g}\cup\Gamma_{i}^{h}, & \Gamma_{i}^{g}\cap\Gamma_{i}^{h} & =\phi, & i & =1,\cdots,n_{sd}
\end{aligned}$$

The displacement, velocity, and stress field are denoted by
$\mathbf{u}$, $mathbf{v}$, and $\sigma$, respectively. The infinitesimal
strain tensor, $\varepsilon$, and stretching tensor, $\mathbf{d}$, are
given by $$\begin{aligned}
\varepsilon:={\mathbf{e}}\left({\mathbf{u}}\right) & =\frac{1}{2}\left({{\mathbf{u}}\otimes{\nabla_{x}}}\right)+\frac{1}{2}\left({{\nabla_{x}}\otimes{\mathbf{u}}}\right), & {\varepsilon_{ij}} & ={e_{ij}}\left({\mathbf{u}}\right)=\frac{1}{2}\left({\frac{{\partial{u_{i}}}}{{\partial{x_{j}}}}+\frac{{\partial{u_{j}}}}{{\partial{x_{i}}}}}\right)\label{eq:ch3-eq-119}
\end{aligned}$$ $$\begin{aligned}
{\mathbf{d}}:={\mathbf{e}}\left({\mathbf{v}}\right) & =\frac{1}{2}\left({{\mathbf{v}}\otimes{\nabla_{x}}}\right)+\frac{1}{2}\left({{\nabla_{x}}\otimes{\mathbf{v}}}\right), & {d_{ij}} & ={e_{ij}}\left({\mathbf{v}}\right)=\frac{1}{2}\left({\frac{{\partial{v_{i}}}}{{\partial{x_{j}}}}+\frac{{\partial{v_{j}}}}{{\partial{x_{i}}}}}\right)\label{eq:ch3-eq-120}
\end{aligned}$$ in which $\varepsilon_{ij}$, $d_{ij}$, $u_{i}$ and
$v_{i}$ denote the Cartesian components of $\varepsilon$, $\mathbf{d}$,
$\mathbf{u}$, and $\mathbf{v}$, respectively.

In the small strain framework, the linear elastic constitutive
relationship is described as, $$\begin{aligned}
\dot{\sigma}_{ij} & =C_{ijkl}d_{kl}, & \sigma_{ij} & =C_{ijkl}\varepsilon_{kl}\label{eq:ch3-eq-121}
\end{aligned}$$ where $\dot{\sigma}_{ij}$ denotes the first-order time
derivative of the stress field, and $C_{ijkl}$ is the fourth-order
elasticity tensor. In the case of an isotropic material, the elasticity
tensor is expressed using the Lame parameters, $\lambda,\mu$:
$$C_{ijkl}:=\lambda\delta_{ij}\delta_{kl}+2\mu\left(\frac{\delta_{ik}\delta_{jl}+\delta_{il}\delta_{jk}}{2}\right)\label{eq:ch3-eq-122}$$
in which $\delta_{ij}$ represents the Kronecker-delta function. If $i=j$
then $\delta_{ij}=1$, otherwise $\delta_{ij}=0$.

The strong form of the initial-boundary value problem of elastodynamics
can be stated as: given the functions
$$b_{i}:\Omega\times\left[0,T\right]\rightarrow\mathbb{R},$$
$$g_{i}:\Gamma_{i}^{g}\times\left[0,T\right]\rightarrow\mathbb{R},$$
$$f_{i}^{s}:\Gamma_{i}^{h}\times\left[0,T\right]\rightarrow\mathbb{R},$$
$${u_{0}}_{i}:\Omega\rightarrow\mathbb{R},$$
$${v_{0}}_{i}:\Omega\rightarrow\mathbb{R},$$
$$\rho:\Omega\rightarrow\mathbb{R},$$ find
$u_{i}:\bar{\Omega}\times\left[0,T\right]\rightarrow\mathbb{R}$, such
that

$$\begin{aligned}
\rho\frac{{{\partial^{2}}{u_{i}}}}{{\partial{t^{2}}}}-\frac{{\partial{\sigma_{ij}}}}{{\partial{x_{j}}}}-\rho{b_{i}} & =0, & \forall(\mathbf{x},t)\in\Omega\times(0,T)\label{eq:ch3-eq-123}
\end{aligned}$$ $$\begin{aligned}
{u_{i}} & ={g_{i}}, & \forall(\mathbf{x},t)\in\Gamma_{i}^{g}\times(0,T)\label{eq:ch3-eq-124}
\end{aligned}$$ $$\begin{aligned}
{\sigma_{ij}}{n_{j}} & =f_{i}^{s}, & \forall(\mathbf{x},t)\in\Gamma_{i}^{h}\times(0,T)\label{eq:ch3-eq-125}
\end{aligned}$$ $$\begin{aligned}
{u_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},0}\right) & ={u_{0i}}, & \forall\mathbf{x}\in\Omega\label{eq:ch3-eq-126}
\end{aligned}$$ $$\begin{aligned}
\frac{{\partial{u_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},0}\right)}}{{\partial t}} & ={v_{0i}}, & \forall\mathbf{x}\in\Omega\label{eq:ch3-eq-127}
\end{aligned}$$ where $\rho$ is the mass density of the elastic body,
$b_{i}$ is the body force density, $g_{i}$ is the prescribed
displacement on the Dirichlet-boundary $\Gamma_{i}^{g}$, $f_{i}^{s}$ is
the prescribed traction on the Neumann-boundary $\Gamma_{i}^{h}$,
$u_{0i}$ is the initial value of the displacement field, and $v_{0i}$ is
the initial value of the velocity field.

# Time-discontinuous space-time FEM (TDG/ST/FEM) for Elastodynamics {#sec:ch3-sec6}

Let $\Omega_{h}$, the set of finite spatial elements
$\Omega_{e},e=1,\cdots,n_{el}$, be the discretization of spatial domain
$\Omega$, where $n_{el}$ is the total number of spatial elements in
$\Omega_{h}$. Furthermore, consider a non-uniform subdivision for the
time domain $\left[0,T\right]$, $$0=t_{0}<t_{1}<\cdots<t_{N}=T$$ with
$$I_{n}=(t_{n},t_{n}+1),\quad\Delta t_{n}=t_{n+1}-t_{n},\quad\Delta t=\mathop{\max}\limits_{0\leqslant n\leqslant N-1}\Delta{t_{n}}.$$
The space-time slab $Q_{n}$ and the space-time finite element $Q_{n,e}$
are given by following expressions, $$\begin{aligned}
Q_{n} & :=\Omega_{h}\times I_{n}, & Q_{n,e} & :=\Omega_{e},\quad e=1,\cdots,n_{el}
\end{aligned}$$ Accordingly,
$${\mathbb{Q}_{h}}:=\bigcup\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{{Q_{n}}}$$ denotes the
discretization of the entire space-time domain.

In TDG/ST/FEM, the unknown fields remains continuous in the spatial
domain $\Omega_{h}$, and discontinuity in time occurs at times that
belong to the finite set,
$${D_{t}}:=\left\{ {{t_{0}},{t_{1}},\ldots,{t_{N}}}\right\} .$$
Therefore, at the discrete times $t\in D_{t}$ the solution have two
values, and the jump discontinuity in time for some unknown scalar field
$q(\mathbf{x},t)$ at time $t_{n}\in D_{t}$ is given by Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-128\]](#eq:ch3-eq-128){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-128"}
$${\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{q\left({\mathbf{x}}\right)}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}}=q_{n}^{+}\left({\mathbf{x}}\right)-q_{n}^{-}\left({\mathbf{x}}\right)\label{eq:ch3-eq-128}$$
where $$\begin{aligned}
q_{n}^{+}\left({\mathbf{x}}\right) & =\mathop{\lim}\limits_{\varepsilon\to0}q\left({{\mathbf{x}},{t_{n}}+\varepsilon}\right), & q_{n}^{-}\left({\mathbf{x}}\right) & =\mathop{\lim}\limits_{\varepsilon\to0}q\left({{\mathbf{x}},{t_{n}}-\varepsilon}\right)\label{eq:ch3-eq-129}
\end{aligned}$$ denote the right and left limits of the unknown field
$q(\mathbf{x},t)$ at time $t=t_{n}$, respectively.

Let us now consider ${\wp_{l}}\left({Q_{n,e}^ {}}\right)$, the
collection of all polynomials defined on $Q_{n,e}$ with a total degree
of no more than $l$, and $C^{0}(\star)$, the space of piecewise
continuous functions defined on domain $(\star)$. Consider also the
following collection of functions:
$$\Im_{l}^{h}:=\left\{ {\left.{{{\mathbf{u}}^{h}}}\right|{{\mathbf{u}}^{h}}\in{C^{0}}{{\left({\bigcup\limits_{n=0}^{N-1}{{Q_{n}}}}\right)}^{{n_{sd}}}},\left.{{{\mathbf{u}}^{h}}}\right|{Q_{n,e}}\in{{\left({{\wp_{l}}\left({{Q_{n,e}}}\right)}\right)}^{{n_{sd}}}}}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-130}$$
where ${\left.{{{\mathbf{u}}^{h}}}\right|{Q_{n,e}}}$ is the restriction
of $\mathbf{u}^{h}$ to $Q_{n,e}$. Lastly, the space of the test
functions for the TDG/ST/FEM is given as
$${V^{h}}:=\left\{ {\left.{{{\mathbf{u}}^{h}}}\right|{{\mathbf{u}}^{h}}\in\Im_{l}^{h},u_{i}^{h}=0,\forall\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right)\in\Gamma_{i}^{g}\times{I_{n}},{\text{for }}i=1,\cdots,{n_{sd}}}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-131}$$

In what follows, a general introduction to the two-field TDG/ST/FEM is
provided, then the weak-form for the v-ST/FEM is derived by using the
two-field formulation.

## Two-field TDG/ST/FEM

In the two-field formulation, both the displacement field and velocity
field are taken as primary unknowns. Accordingly, the weak form should
satisfy the following conditions in the weak sense:

1.  Balance of the linear momentum, Eq.
    [\[eq:ch3-eq-123\]](#eq:ch3-eq-123){reference-type="eqref"
    reference="eq:ch3-eq-123"}

2.  Essential and natural boundary conditions, Eq.
    [\[eq:ch3-eq-124\]](#eq:ch3-eq-124){reference-type="eqref"
    reference="eq:ch3-eq-124"} and Eq.
    [\[eq:ch3-eq-125\]](#eq:ch3-eq-125){reference-type="eqref"
    reference="eq:ch3-eq-125"}

3.  Traction continuity in space;

4.  Continuity of the velocity field in time;
    $${\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{{\mathbf{v}}^{h}}\left({\mathbf{x}}\right)}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}}=0$$

5.  Continuity of the displacement field in time;
    $${\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{{\mathbf{u}}^{h}}\left({\mathbf{x}}\right)}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]_{n}}=0$$

6.  Displacement-velocity compatibility condition;
    $$\frac{{\partial{{\mathbf{u}}^{h}}}}{{\partial t}}-{{\mathbf{v}}^{h}}=0$$

Here, Conditions (i)--(iii) are always satisfied as the weak form is
derived by employing the Galerkin method [@Hughes2012]. Conditions (iv)
and (v) necessary due to the time-discontinuous approximation of the
displacement and velocity field, respectively. Condition (vi) is due to
the independent approximation of the displacement field and velocity
field.

The displacement-velocity two-field weak-form for TDG/ST/FEM in its
original form as presented by @Hughes1988 is described as follows.

::: weakform
*Weak-form 4*. Find $\mathbf{u}\in S_{u}^{h}$ and
$\mathbf{v}\in S_{v}^{h}$ such that for all $\delta\mathbf{u}\in V^{h}$
and $\delta\mathbf{v}\in V^{h}$, and for all $n=1,\cdots,N-1$ Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-132\]](#eq:ch3-eq-132){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-132"} holds.

$$\begin{split} & \int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{\delta{v_{i}}\rho\frac{{\partial{v_{i}}}}{{\partial t}}d\Omega}dt}+\int_{{\Omega_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{v_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t_{n}^{+}}\right)\rho{{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{v_{i}}\left({\mathbf{x}}\right)}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]}_{n}}d\Omega}\\
 & +\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{\frac{{\partial\delta v_{i}^ {}}}{{\partial{x_{j}}}}{\sigma_{ij}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right)d\Omega}dt}-\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{\Gamma_{i}^{h}}^ {}{\delta{v_{i}}f_{i}^{s}ds}dt}\\
 & -\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{\delta{v_{i}}\rho{b_{i}}d\Omega}dt}+\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{\frac{{\partial\delta{u_{i}}}}{{\partial{x_{j}}}}{C_{ijkl}}\frac{\partial}{{\partial{x_{l}}}}\left({\frac{{\partial{u_{k}}}}{{\partial t}}-{v_{k}}}\right)d\Omega}dt}\\
 & +\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{\frac{{\partial\delta{u_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},{t_{n}}}\right)}}{{\partial{x_{j}}}}{C_{ijkl}}\frac{{\partial{{\left[\kern-0.15em \left[{{u_{k}}\left({\mathbf{x}}\right)}\right]\kern-0.15em \right]}_{n}}}}{{\partial{x_{l}}}}d\Omega}=0
\end{split}
\label{eq:ch3-eq-132}$$ where $S_{u}^{h}$ and $S_{v}^{h}$ denote the
collections of trial functions for the displacement field and velocity
field, respectively, and given by
$$S_{u}^{h}:=\left\{ {\left.{\mathbf{u}}\right|{\mathbf{u}}\in\Im_{l}^{h},{u_{i}}={g_{i}},\forall\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right)\in\Gamma_{i}^{g}\times{I_{n}},i=1,\cdots,{n_{sd}}}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-133}$$
$$S_{v}^{h}:=\left\{ {\left.{\mathbf{v}}\right|{\mathbf{v}}\in\Im_{l}^{h},{v_{i}}=\frac{{\partial{g_{i}}}}{{\partial t}},\forall\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right)\in\Gamma_{i}^{g}\times{I_{n}},i=1,\cdots,{n_{sd}}}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-134}$$
:::

It is noteworthy that in the above-mentioned weak-form, Conditions (v)
and (vi) are satisfied by using a strain-energy norm and Condition (iv)
is satisfied by using a kinetic energy norm.

## Velocity based TDG/ST/FEM: v-ST/FEM 

In the velocity based time-discontinuous space-time finite element
method (v-ST/FEM) displacement-velocity compatibility condition is
strongly enforced by computing the displacement field from the
consistent time-integration of the velocity field. Accordingly,
displacement field remains continuous in time while velocity field still
remains discontinuous at the discrete times.

The weak-form for the v-ST/FEM can be stated as:

::: weakform
*Weak-form 5*. Find $\mathbf{v}\in S_{v}^{h}$ such that for all
$\delta\mathbf{v}\in V^{h}$, and for all $n=1,\cdots,N-1$, Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-135\]](#eq:ch3-eq-135){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-135"} holds.
$$\begin{split} & \int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{\delta{v_{i}}\rho\frac{{\partial{v_{i}}}}{{\partial t}}d\Omega}dt}+\int_{{\Omega_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{v_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t_{n}^{+}}\right)\rho{v_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t_{n}^{+}}\right)d\Omega}\\
 & +\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{\frac{{\partial\delta v_{i}^ {}}}{{\partial{x_{j}}}}{\sigma_{ij}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right)d\Omega}dt}-\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{\Gamma_{i}^{h}}^ {}{\delta{v_{i}}f_{i}^{s}ds}dt}\\
 & -\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{\delta{v_{i}}\rho{b_{i}}d\Omega}dt}-\int_{{\Omega_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{v_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t_{n}^{+}}\right)\rho{v_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t_{n}^{-}}\right)d\Omega}=0
\end{split}
\label{eq:ch3-eq-135}$$
:::

The displacement field is computed by
$${\mathbf{u}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right)={\mathbf{u}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},{t_{n}}}\right)+\int_{{t_{n}}}^{t}{{\mathbf{v}\left({{\mathbf{x}},{\tau}}\right)}d\tau},\qquad\forall\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right)\in{Q_{n}},\quad\forall{\mathbf{v}}\in S_{v}^{h}\label{eq:ch3-eq-136}$$

In the case of hyperelastic material law, the stress is computed by
first computing the displacement field (see Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-119\]](#eq:ch3-eq-119){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-119"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-121\]](#eq:ch3-eq-121){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-121"}b). Alternatively, if the constitutive
relationship is given in the rate form (e.g., hypoelastic form) then
stress field can be obtained by time integration of the rate form. In
latter case, computation of displacement field can be avoided. In the
realm of small strain theory, however, these two techniques of stress
recovery are equivalent, and the stress field in a space-time slab takes
the form
$${\sigma_{ij}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right)={\sigma_{ij}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},{t_{n}}}\right)+{C_{ijkl}}{\psi_{kl}}\left({{\mathbf{v}},t}\right),\qquad\forall\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right)\in{Q_{n}},\forall v\in S_{v}^{h}\label{eq:ch3-eq-137}$$
where
$${\psi_{ij}}\left({{\mathbf{v}},t}\right)=\int_{{t_{n}}}^{t}{\frac{{\partial{v_{i}}}}{{\partial{x_{j}}}}d\tau,}\qquad\forall t\in{I_{n}},\forall{\mathbf{v}}\in S_{v}^{h}\label{eq:ch3-eq-138}$$

Subsequently, by substituting the expression for the stress given in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-137\]](#eq:ch3-eq-137){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-137"} into the weak-form, Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-135\]](#eq:ch3-eq-135){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-135"}, the following weak-form for v-ST/FEM is
obtained;

::: weakform
*Weak-form 6*. Find $\mathbf{v}\in S_{v}^{h}$ such that for all
$\delta\mathbf{v}\in V^{h}$, and for all $n=1,\cdots,N-1$, Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-139\]](#eq:ch3-eq-139){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-139"} holds.
$$\begin{split} & \int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{\delta{v_{i}}\rho\frac{{\partial{v_{i}}}}{{\partial t}}d\Omega}dt}+\int_{{\Omega_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{v_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t_{n}^{+}}\right)\rho{v_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t_{n}^{+}}\right)d\Omega}\\
 & +\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{\frac{{\partial\delta v_{i}^ {}}}{{\partial{x_{j}}}}{\sigma_{ij}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},{t_{n}}}\right)d\Omega}dt}+\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{\frac{{\partial\delta v_{i}^ {}}}{{\partial{x_{j}}}}{C_{ijkl}}{\psi_{kl}}d\Omega}dt}\\
 & -\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{\Gamma_{i}^{h}}^ {}{\delta{v_{i}}f_{i}^{s}ds}dt}-\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{\delta{v_{i}}\rho{b_{i}}d\Omega}dt}\\
 & -\int_{{\Omega_{n}}}^ {}{\delta{v_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t_{n}^{+}}\right)\rho{v_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t_{n}^{-}}\right)d\Omega}=0
\end{split}
\label{eq:ch3-eq-139}$$
:::

::: remark
*Remark 12*. In the two-field TDG/ST/FEM, both displacement and velocity
are the primary unknown. This approach usually yields a large system of
linear equations which in turn increases the computation cost. In this
case, special procedures are required to reduce the size of the problem.
Such procedures are mainly based on the predictor-multicorrector schemes
[@Bonelli2002; @Bonelli2003; @Mancuso2003; @Kunthong2005].
:::

::: remark
*Remark 13*. In v-ST/FEM, velocity field is the primary unknown,
therefore, the resultant system of linear equations will be
significantly smaller than the one in case of two-field TDG/ST/FEM.
Accordingly, the computation cost of v-ST/FEM is lower than the
two-field TDG/ST/FEM, however, the cost is still higher than the
classical semi-discrete schemes.
:::

## Implementation of v-ST/FEM

Consider $Q_{n,e}=\Omega_{e}\times I_{n}$ denoting the space-time finite
element. Let $n_{e}$ be the total number of spatial nodes in the spatial
finite element $\Omega_{e}$. Let $v_{i}(\mathbf{x},t_{n}^{+})$ and
$v_{i}(\mathbf{x},t_{n+1}^{-})$ be the spatial nodal velocities on the
bottom and top faces of space-time slab $Q_{n}$, respectively (see
Fig.[17](#fig:ch3-fig-17){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-17"}). Furthermore, time $t\in I_{n}$ is given by
$$t=T_{1}(\theta)t_{n}+T_{2}(\theta)t_{n+1},\quad\forall\theta\in\left[-1,1\right]\label{eq:ch3-eq-140}$$
where $$\begin{aligned}
T_{1}(\theta) & =\frac{1-\theta}{2} & T_{2}(\theta) & =\frac{1+\theta}{2}\label{eq:ch3-eq-141}
\end{aligned}$$

![Schematic diagram of the space-time slabs $Q_{n}$ and
$Q_{n+1}$](figures/ch3-fig-17){#fig:ch3-fig-17 width="80%"}

![Schematic diagram of the space-time finite element
$Q_{n,e}$](figures/ch3-fig-18){#fig:ch3-fig-18}

The linear trial functions for the velocity defined on $Q_{n,e}$ are
give by
$${v_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right)={}_{}^{a}{v_{iI}}{T_{a}}\left(\theta\right){N^{I}}\left({\xi,\eta}\right),\quad\,a=1,2;\quad\,I=1,\cdots,{n_{e}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-142}$$
where $_{}^{a}{v_{iI}}$ denotes the space-time nodal values of velocity;
$a=1$ and $a=2$ correspond to the bottom and top face (i.e., temporal
nodes) of the space-time element, and $I=1,\cdots,n_{e}$ denotes the
spatial node of the space-time element (see Fig.
[18](#fig:ch3-fig-18){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-18"}).
$N^{I}(\xi,\eta)$ are the spatial shape functions defined on the local
domain. Accordingly, $v_{i}(\mathbf{x},t_{n}^{+})$ and
$v_{i}(\mathbf{x},t_{n+1}^{-})$ are given by Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-143\]](#eq:ch3-eq-143){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-143"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-144\]](#eq:ch3-eq-144){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-144"}, respectively.
$${v_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t_{n}^{+}}\right)={}_{}^{1}{v_{iI}}{N^{I}}\left({\xi,\eta}\right)\label{eq:ch3-eq-143}$$
$${v_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t_{n+1}^{-}}\right)={}_{}^{2}{v_{iI}}{N^{I}}\left({\xi,\eta}\right)\label{eq:ch3-eq-144}$$

The displacement field corresponding to the above-mentioned local
interpolation for the velocity field (cf. Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-142\]](#eq:ch3-eq-142){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-142"}) is obtained by using Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-136\]](#eq:ch3-eq-136){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-136"}.
$${u_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right)={u_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},{t_{n}}}\right)+{\tilde{T}_{1}}\left(\theta\right){v_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},{t_{n}}}\right)+{\tilde{T}_{2}}\left(\theta\right){v_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},{t_{n+1}}}\right)\label{eq:ch3-eq-145}$$
where $$\begin{aligned}
{{\tilde{T}}_{1}}\left(\theta\right) & =\frac{{\Delta{t_{n}}}}{2}\left[{1-T_{1}^{2}\left(\theta\right)}\right], & {{\tilde{T}}_{2}}\left(\theta\right) & =\frac{{\Delta{t_{n}}}}{2}T_{2}^{2}\left(\theta\right)\label{eq:ch3-eq-146}
\end{aligned}$$ are the quadratic shape function defined on
$\left[-1,1\right]$. Subsequently, $\psi_{ij}$ in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-138\]](#eq:ch3-eq-138){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-138"} becomes,
$${\psi_{ij}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right)={}^{a}{v_{iI}}{{\tilde{T}}_{a}}\frac{{\partial{N^{I}}}}{{\partial{x_{j}}}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-147}$$
By using the expression for $psi_{ij}$ in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-137\]](#eq:ch3-eq-137){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-137"} the stress $\sigma_{ij}$ inside the
space-time element is described as, $$\begin{aligned}
{\sigma_{ij}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right) & ={\sigma_{ij}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},{t_{n}}}\right)+{{\tilde{T}}_{a}}{C_{ijkl}}\frac{{\partial{N^{I}}}}{{\partial{x_{l}}}}{}^{a}{v_{kI}}, & \forall(\mathbf{x},t)\in Q_{n,e}\label{eq:ch3-eq-148}
\end{aligned}$$

Lastly, the test functions for the velocity field are desribed as
$${\delta v_{i}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right)={}_{}^{a}{\delta v_{iI}}{T_{a}}\left(\theta\right){N^{I}}\left({\xi,\eta}\right),\quad\,a=1,2;\quad\,I=1,\cdots,{n_{e}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-149}$$

Using Eq. ([\[eq:ch3-eq-140\]](#eq:ch3-eq-140){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-140"} --
[\[eq:ch3-eq-149\]](#eq:ch3-eq-149){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-149"}) for the space-time finite element
discretization of the weak-form which is given in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-139\]](#eq:ch3-eq-139){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-139"}.

$$\begin{split} & ^{a}\delta{v_{iI}}\left[{\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{{N^{I}}{T_{a}}\rho\frac{{\partial{N^{J}}{T_{b}}}}{{\partial t}}d\Omega}dt}}\right]{}^{b}{v_{iJ}}{+^{a}}\delta{v_{iI}}\left[{{\delta_{1a}}{\delta_{1b}}\int_{{\Omega_{n}}}^ {}{{N^{I}}\rho{N^{J}}d\Omega}}\right]{}^{b}{v_{iJ}}\\
 & {+^{a}}\delta v_{iI}^ {}\left\{ {\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{{T_{a}}\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{\frac{{\partial{N^{I}}}}{{\partial{x_{j}}}}\sigma_{ij}^{n}d\Omega}dt}}\right\} {+^{a}}\delta v_{iI}^ {}\left[{\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{{T_{a}}{{\tilde{T}}_{b}}\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{\frac{{\partial{N^{I}}}}{{\partial{x_{j}}}}{C_{ijkl}}\frac{{\partial{N^{J}}}}{{\partial{x_{l}}}}d\Omega}dt}}\right]{}^{b}{v_{kJ}}\\
 & -^{a}\delta{v_{iI}}\left\{ {\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{\Gamma_{i}^{h}}^ {}{{T_{a}}{N^{I}}f_{i}^{s}ds}dt}}\right\} -{}^{a}\delta{v_{iI}}\left\{ {\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{{T_{a}}{N^{I}}\rho{b_{i}}d\Omega}dt}}\right\} \\
 & -^{a}\delta{v_{iI}}\left[{{\delta_{1a}}\int_{{\Omega_{n}}}^ {}{{N^{I}}\rho{N^{J}}d\Omega}}\right]v_{iJ}^{-}=0
\end{split}
\label{eq:ch3-eq-150}$$

Let us now use the following notation for representing the global
space-time nodal vector,
$$\left\{ {\mathbf{J}}\right\} :=\left\{ J\right\} _{i}^{a}\left(I\right)$$
here $a=1,2$ corresponds to the temporal nodes, $I=1,\cdots$ corresponds
to the $I^{th}$ spatial node, and $i=1,2$ corresponds to spatial
components. Accordingly, $a=1$ corresponds to the spatial nodal values
of the vector defined at the bottom space-time slab (i.e., at time
$t_{n}^{+}$). Similarly, $a=2$ corresponds to the spatial nodal values
of the vector at the top space-time slab (i.e., at time $t_{n+1}^{-}$).

A typical space-time finite element matrix will be denoted as:
$$\left[{\mathbf{K}}\right]:=\left[K\right]_{ij}^{ab}\left({I,J}\right)$$
where $a,b=1,2$ corresponds to the temporal nodes, $I=1,\cdots,n_{e}$
corresponds to the spatial node, and $i,j=1,2$ corresponds to the
spatial components.

By using these notations Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-150\]](#eq:ch3-eq-150){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-150"} can be expressed as:

$$\left\{ {\delta v}\right\} _{i}^{a}\left(I\right)\cdot\left(\begin{gathered}\left[M\right]_{ij}^{ab}\left({I,J}\right)\cdot\left\{ v\right\} _{j}^{b}\left(J\right)+\left[K\right]_{ij}^{ab}\left({I,J}\right)\cdot\left\{ v\right\} _{j}^{b}\left(J\right)\\
+\left\{ {{J_{{\sigma^{n}}}}}\right\} _{i}^{a}\left(I\right)-\left\{ {{J_{ext}}}\right\} _{i}^{a}\left(I\right)-\left\{ {{J_{0}}}\right\} _{i}^{a}\left(I\right)
\end{gathered}
\right)=0\label{eq:ch3-eq-151}$$

Since above equation is true for all values of
$\left\{ \delta v\right\} _{i}^{a}$ one can obtain the following the
system of linear equations:
$$\left[M\right]_{ij}^{ab}\left({I,J}\right)\cdot\left\{ v\right\} _{j}^{b}\left(J\right)+\left[K\right]_{ij}^{ab}\left({I,J}\right)\cdot\left\{ v\right\} _{j}^{b}\left(J\right)=\left\{ {{J_{ext}}}\right\} _{i}^{a}\left(I\right)+\left\{ {{J_{0}}}\right\} _{i}^{a}\left(I\right)-\left\{ {{J_{{\sigma^{n}}}}}\right\} _{i}^{a}\left(I\right)\label{eq:ch3-eq-152}$$
Matrix-vector form of above equation is given as,
$$\left[{\mathbf{M}}\right]\cdot\left\{ {{\mathbf{\tilde{v}}}}\right\} +\left[{\mathbf{K}}\right]\cdot\left\{ {{\mathbf{\tilde{v}}}}\right\} =\left\{ {{{\mathbf{J}}_{ext}}}\right\} +\left\{ {{{\mathbf{J}}_{0}}}\right\} -\left\{ {{{\mathbf{J}}_{{\sigma^{n}}}}}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-153}$$

If Rayleigh damping is used to model the material damping then above
equation becomes:
$$\left[{\mathbf{M}}\right]\cdot\left\{ {{\mathbf{\tilde{v}}}}\right\} +\left[{\mathbf{K}}\right]\cdot\left\{ {{\mathbf{\tilde{v}}}}\right\} +\alpha\left[{{{\mathbf{M}}_{R}}}\right]\cdot\left\{ {{\mathbf{\tilde{v}}}}\right\} +\beta\left[{{{\mathbf{K}}_{R}}}\right]\cdot\left\{ {{\mathbf{\tilde{v}}}}\right\} =\left\{ {{{\mathbf{J}}_{ext}}}\right\} +\left\{ {{{\mathbf{J}}_{0}}}\right\} -\left\{ {{{\mathbf{J}}_{{\sigma^{n}}}}}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-154}$$
where $\alpha$ and $\beta$ are the Rayleigh damping coefficients.

In Eq. ([\[eq:ch3-eq-153\]](#eq:ch3-eq-153){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-153"}--[\[eq:ch3-eq-154\]](#eq:ch3-eq-154){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-154"}), $\left[{\mathbf{M}}\right]$ denotes the
space-time mass matrix, $\left[{\mathbf{K}}\right]$ denotes the
space-time tangent stiffness matrix, $\left[{{{\mathbf{M}}_{R}}}\right]$
is the mass proportional Rayleigh damping matrix, and
$\left[{{{\mathbf{K}}_{R}}}\right]$ is the stiffness proportional
Rayleigh damping matrix. Furthermore,
$\left\{ {{{\mathbf{J}}_{ext}}}\right\}$ denotes the space-time nodal
vectors which contains the contribution of external body force and
external boundary traction, $\left\{ {{{\mathbf{J}}_{0}}}\right\}$
contains the contribution of initial velocity, and
$\left\{ {{{\mathbf{J}}_{\sigma}^{n}}}\right\}$ contains the
contribution of initial stress $\sigma^{n}$. In what follows the finite
element expressions for these matrices and vectors are described.

$$\left[{\mathbf{M}}\right]:=\left[M\right]_{ij}^{ab}\left({I,J}\right)={\delta_{ij}}\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{{T_{a}}\frac{{\partial{T_{b}}}}{{\partial t}}\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{{N^{I}}\rho{N^{J}}d\Omega}dt}+{\delta_{ij}}{\delta_{1a}}{\delta_{1b}}\int_{{\Omega_{n}}}^ {}{{N^{I}}\rho{N^{J}}d\Omega}\label{eq:ch3-eq-155}$$

$$\left[{\mathbf{K}}\right]:=\left[K\right]_{ij}^{ab}\left({I,J}\right)=\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{{T_{a}}{{\tilde{T}}_{b}}\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{\frac{{\partial{N^{I}}}}{{\partial{x_{p}}}}{C_{pijq}}\frac{{\partial{N^{J}}}}{{\partial{x_{q}}}}d\Omega}dt}\label{eq:ch3-eq-156}$$

$$\left[{{{\mathbf{M}}_{R}}}\right]:=\left[{{M_{R}}}\right]_{ij}^{ab}\left({I,J}\right)={\delta_{ij}}\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{{T_{a}}{T_{b}}\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{{N^{I}}{N^{J}}d\Omega}dt}\label{eq:ch3-eq-157}$$

$$\left[{{{\mathbf{K}}_{R}}}\right]:=\left[{{K_{R}}}\right]_{ij}^{ab}\left({I,J}\right)=\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{{T_{a}}{T_{b}}\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{\frac{{\partial{N^{I}}}}{{\partial{x_{p}}}}{C_{pijq}}\frac{{\partial{N^{J}}}}{{\partial{x_{q}}}}d\Omega}dt}\label{eq:ch3-eq-158}$$

$$\left\{ {{{\mathbf{J}}_{ext}}}\right\} :=\left\{ {{J_{ext}}}\right\} _{i}^{a}\left(I\right)=\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{{N^{I}}{T_{a}}\rho{b_{i}}}d\Omega dt}+\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{\int_{\Gamma_{i}^{h}}^ {}{{N^{I}}{T_{a}}\rho f_{i}^{s}}dsdt}\label{eq:ch3-eq-159}$$

$$\left\{ {{{\mathbf{J}}_{0}}}\right\} :=\left\{ {{J_{0}}}\right\} _{i}^{a}\left(I\right)={\delta_{1a}}{\delta_{ij}}\left[{\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{{N^{I}}\rho{N^{J}}d\Omega}}\right]\left\{ {^{0}{v_{jJ}}}\right\} \label{eq:ch3-eq-160}$$
where, $\left\{ {^{0}{v_{jJ}}}\right\}$ denotes the initial velocity for
the space-time slab $Q_{n}$, i.e., spatial nodal velocity at time
$t_{n}^{-}$. Note that this velocity vector is known from the
computation in the previous space-time slab $Q_{n-1}$.

$$\left\{ {{{\mathbf{J}}_{{\sigma^{n}}}}}\right\} :=\left\{ {{J_{{\sigma^{n}}}}}\right\} _{i}^{a}\left(I\right)=\int_{{I_{n}}}^ {}{{T_{a}}\int_{{\Omega_{h}}}^ {}{\frac{{\partial{N^{I}}}}{{\partial{x_{j}}}}\sigma_{ij}^{n}d\Omega}dt}\label{eq:ch3-eq-161}$$
where $\sigma^{n}:=\sigma(\mathbf{x},t_{n})$ is the stress at time
$t_{n}$ which is usually computed from the displacement field at time
$t_{n}$.

This section briefly discusses the space-time matrices and vectors,
however, a detailed description about the derivation of the space-time
matrices and space-time vectors can be found in Appendix
[\[app:app1\]](#app:app1){reference-type="ref" reference="app:app1"}.

# Numerical examples {#sec:ch3-sec7}

## Primary wave propagation in homogeneous linear elastic medium

A theoretical model of homogenous isotropic linear elastic media
occupying a square domain,
$\Omega=\left[0,L\right]\times\left[0,L\right]$, is considered in this
section for a numerical analysis of v-ST/FEM. The governing equations of
the problem are given by Eqs.
([\[eq:ch3-eq-123\]](#eq:ch3-eq-123){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-123"}--[\[eq:ch3-eq-127\]](#eq:ch3-eq-127){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-127"}). Further, it is assumed that the elastic
media is subjected to the periodic boundary conditions with no external
body force (i.e., $b_{i}=0$ in Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-123\]](#eq:ch3-eq-123){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-123"}). The initial conditions for displacement and
velocity field corresponding to the Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-126\]](#eq:ch3-eq-126){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-126"} and Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-127\]](#eq:ch3-eq-127){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-127"} are given as: $$\begin{aligned}
{{\mathbf{u}}_{0}}\left({\mathbf{x}}\right) & ={{\mathbf{d}}_{0}}\cos\left({k{\mathbf{x}}\cdot{\mathbf{\hat{r}}}}\right), & {{\mathbf{v}}_{0}}\left({\mathbf{x}}\right) & =ck{{\mathbf{d}}_{0}}\sin\left({k{\mathbf{x}}\cdot{\mathbf{\hat{r}}}}\right)\label{eq:ch3-eq-162}
\end{aligned}$$ where $k$ is the wave-number, $\hat{\mathbf{r}}$ is the
direction vector of the wave propagation,
$\mathbf{d}_{0}\in\mathbb{R}^{2}$ denotes the direction of the motion of
particles of the medium, and $c$ is related to the speed of the wave in
the medium.

The above-mentioned initial conditions create a plane P-wave if
$\hat{\mathbf{r}}$ vector is parallel to $\mathbf{d}_{0}$. The
analytical solutions for displacement and velocity can be given by
[@Achenbach1973a]: $$\begin{aligned}
{\mathbf{u}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right) & ={{\mathbf{d}}_{0}}\cos\left[{k\left({{\mathbf{x}}\cdot{\mathbf{\hat{r}}}-{c_{p}}t}\right)}\right] & {\mathbf{v}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right)={c_{p}}k{{\mathbf{d}}_{0}}\sin\left[{k\left({{\mathbf{x}}\cdot{\mathbf{\hat{r}}}-{c_{p}}t}\right)}\right]\label{eq:ch3-eq-163}
\end{aligned}$$ where $${c_{p}}=\sqrt{\frac{{\lambda+2\mu}}{\rho}}$$ is
the speed of the P-wave.

::: {#tab:ch3-tab-2}
  $L$               $\lambda$   $\mu$   $\rho$         $k$            $\mathbf{d}_{0}$            $\hat{\mathbf{r}}$           $c_{p}$
  ---------------- ----------- ------- -------- ----------------- ------------------------ --------------------------------- ---------
  \[6pt\] $10.0$      $2.0$     $1.0$   $1.0$    $\sqrt{2}\pi/5$   $\left[1,1\right]^{T}$   $\left[1,1\right]^{T}/\sqrt{2}$      $2.0$
  \[6pt\]                                                                                                                    

  :  List of constants and parameter values used for the P-wave
  propagation problem. All variables are dimensionless.
:::

The values of constants and the parameters used for solving the problem
are given in Table [2](#tab:ch3-tab-2){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:ch3-tab-2"}, and Fig.
[19](#fig:ch3-fig-19){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-19"}
depicts the physical dimensions of the problem. All variables have been
made dimensionless. Letting $\mathbf{u}^{h}(\mathbf{x},t)$ and
$\mathbf{v}^{h}(\mathbf{x},t)$ denote the numerical solutions computed
by employing the v-ST/FEM, the error in displacement field
${E_{u}}\left({{t_{n}}}\right)$ and the error in velocity field
${E_{v}}\left({{t_{n}}}\right)$ are then defined as: $$\begin{aligned}
{E_{u}}\left({{t_{n}}}\right) & :={\left\Vert {{{\mathbf{u}}^{h}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},{t_{n}}}\right)-{\mathbf{u}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},{t_{n}}}\right)}\right\Vert _{2}}, & {E_{v}}\left({{t_{n}}}\right) & :={\left\Vert {{{\mathbf{v}}^{h}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t_{n}^{-}}\right)-{\mathbf{v}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},{t_{n}}}\right)}\right\Vert _{2}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-164}
\end{aligned}$$ where $\left\Vert {\,\cdot\,}\right\Vert _{2}$ denotes
the $L_{2}$ norm given by
$${\left\Vert {\mathbf{u}}\right\Vert _{2}}={\left[{\int_{\Omega}^ {}{{\mathbf{u}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right)\cdot{\mathbf{u}}\left({{\mathbf{x}},t}\right)d\Omega}}\right]^{1/2}}\label{eq:ch3-eq-165}$$

![(a) Schematic diagram of the spatial domain for P-wave propagation
problem, (b) bilinear quadrilateral element (Quad4), (c) linear
triangular element (Tria3)](figures/ch3-fig-19){#fig:ch3-fig-19}

![ Rate of convergence of the solutions in space computed at time
$t=1.0$ sec: (a) displacement, and (b) velocity
](figures/ch3-fig-20){#fig:ch3-fig-20 width="100%"}

![ Rate of convergence of the solutions in time domain at time $t=35.0$
sec: (a) displacement, and (b) velocity.
](figures/ch3-fig-21){#fig:ch3-fig-21 width="100%"}

The numerical experiments for determining the convergence rate of the
solution in the space domain are performed on two sequences of regular
linear triangular (Tria3) and bilinear quadrilateral (Quad4) meshes (see
Fig. [19](#fig:ch3-fig-19){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-19"}), while keeping the time-step fixed
$\Delta t=0.1$ sec. Each sequence consists of four meshes with a
decreasing mesh size. In Fig. [20](#fig:ch3-fig-20){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-20"}, the L2 norm of the errors in the
displacement and velocity fields at time $t=1.0$ sec are given in
relation to mesh spacing parameter $h$. Based on the convergence
results, it can be stated that the v-ST/FEM formulation is nearly
second-order accurate in the space for both Quad4 and Tria3 elements. In
Fig. [20](#fig:ch3-fig-20){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-20"}, it is observed that the error for the
triangular spatial mesh (Tria3) is less than that of the quadrilateral
spatial element (Quad4) for the same mesh spacing. This can be
attributed to the perfect alignment of the diagonal of the triangular
elements with the characteristic lines of the wave propagation.

![ (a) Exact displacement (x-component) waveforms, (b) displacement
(x-component) waveforms obtained by using the v-ST/FEM, (c) exact
velocity (x-component) waveforms, (d) velocity (x-component) waveforms
obtained by using the v-ST/FEM. ](figures/ch3-fig-22){#fig:ch3-fig-22
width="90%"}

Furthermore, the convergence of the solutions (displacement and
velocity) in the time domain is illustrated in Fig.
[21](#fig:ch3-fig-21){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-21"}.
It can be seen that both displacement and velocity fields computed by
the present method are third order accurate in time. Note that the
results presented in Fig. [21](#fig:ch3-fig-21){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-21"} are consistent with Eq.
[\[eq:ch3-eq-114\]](#eq:ch3-eq-114){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:ch3-eq-114"}.

Fig. [22](#fig:ch3-fig-22){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-22"} illustrates the spatial variation of the
displacement and velocity fields obtained by v-ST/FEM. The results are
obtained at time $t=35$ seconds with linear triangular mesh of size
$h=0.25$ and uniform time-step of size $\Delta t=0.1$ sec. The results
advocate the ability of v-ST/FEM to maintain the high-order accuracy of
the long-term solutions, especially the displacement and velocity
waveforms. This can be attributed to the very low numerical dissipation
and dispersion characteristics of the present method (see also Fig.
[15](#fig:ch3-fig-15){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-15"}
and Fig. [16](#fig:ch3-fig-16){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-16"}). To further emphasize the accuracy of the
long-term solutions, the time histories of the computed displacement and
velocity at the midpoint P1 (see Fig.
[19](#fig:ch3-fig-19){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-19"})
and the corresponding relative errors are presented in Fig.
[23](#fig:ch3-fig-23){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-23"}.

![ Temporal variation of the (a) displacement, (b) relative error in
displacement, (c) velocity, and (d) relative error in velocity, at the
midpoint P1 computed by using v-ST/FEM.
](figures/ch3-fig-23){#fig:ch3-fig-23 width="90%"}

## Impulsive response of a fixed-free pile

In this section, we consider a pile of length $L=50$ m with a unit
cross-section area having one fixed end and one end loaded by an axial
impulsive force given by a step function, as shown in Fig.
[24](#fig:ch3-fig-24){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-24"}.
The mass density $\rho$ is  $2500.0$ $kg/m^{3}$  and the Young's modulus
$E$ is  $1.0\times10^{10}$ $N/m^{2}$ . The magnitude of the implusive
force is $1.0\times10^{6}$ $N$. Under these circumstances, the
analytical solutions for the stress and velocity fields are
discontinuous in the spatial domain and given by the step functions.
Furthermore, the displacements are given by the piecewise continuous
linear functions [@Cormeau1991; @Li1998; @Verruijt2009].

![ Geometry, boundary conditions, and impulse loading for fixed-free
pile problem. ](figures/ch3-fig-24){#fig:ch3-fig-24}

To solve the problem by using v-ST/FEM, uniform linear spatial elements
of size $h=0.1m$ and a uniform time-step size $\Delta t=10^{-4}$ sec
have been adopted for discretizing the space and time domain,
respectively. To assess the performance of the present method, the
problem is also solved with semi-discretized FEM techniques using the
same mesh parameters. In the latter case, the trapezoidal rule and the
HHT-$\alpha$ method (with $\alpha=-1/3$) have been used as the
time-stepping algorithms. The results of the stress field, velocity
field, and displacement field obtained by different schemes are compared
in Fig. [25](#fig:ch3-fig-25){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-25"}, Fig.
[26](#fig:ch3-fig-26){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-26"},
and Fig. [27](#fig:ch3-fig-27){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-27"}, respectively.

It is observed that the solutions for the stress and velocity fields
obtained by the semi-discrete algorithms contain severe oscillations.
Even worse, no improvement whatsoever is obtained when refining the mesh
spacing or the time-step size. Further, in the case of the Newmark-beta
method, these oscillations are present in the whole spatial domain; and
thus, the accuracy of the stress and velocity fields deteriorate over
time (see Fig. [25](#fig:ch3-fig-25){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-25"} and Fig.
[26](#fig:ch3-fig-26){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-26"}).
The poor performance with the Newmark-beta method is due to the absence
of algorithmic damping, as discussed in previous sections. The
HHT-$\alpha$ method improves the solutions by attenuating higher
frequencies; however, the results are not satisfactory for the selected
time-step size as the oscillations are still present. It is remarkable
that v-ST/FEM completely localizes the oscillations in the stress and
velocity fields near the point of discontinuity and yields very accurate
solutions. The localization phenomenon can be attributed to the presence
of jump discontinuity in the velocity field. The jump in the velocity
field adds artificial viscous damping to the system, subsequently,
increasing the accuracy and stabilizing the solutions
[@Hulbert1990; @Johnson1993]. Furthermore, the presence of overshooting
and undershooting around the point of discontinuity is related to the
famous Gibbs phenomenon in the Fourier analysis [@Olver2016].

![ Stress field computed by employing the Newmark-beta method (First
column), HHT-$\alpha$ (Second column), and v-ST/FEM (Third column) at
various timesteps with linear spatial elements. Direction of wave
propagation is denoted by the arrow, and dotted lines represent the
analytical solutions. ](figures/ch3-fig-25){#fig:ch3-fig-25
width="100%"}

![ Velocity field computed by employing the Newmark-beta method (First
column), HHT-$\alpha$ (Second column), and v-ST/FEM (Third column) at
various time-steps with linear spatial elements. Direction of wave
propagation is denoted by the arrow, and dotted lines represent the
analytical solutions. ](figures/ch3-fig-26){#fig:ch3-fig-26
width="100%"}

![ Displacement field computed by employing the Newmark-beta method
(First column), HHT-$\alpha$ (Second column), and v-ST/FEM (Third
column) at various timesteps with linear spatial elements. Direction of
wave propagation is denoted by the arrow.
](figures/ch3-fig-27){#fig:ch3-fig-27 width="100%"}

## Dynamic plate load test (DPLT)

In this section, an attempt is made to validate v-ST/FEM by simulating
the dynamic plate loading test (DPLT) using a light falling weight
deflectometer (LFWD). DPLT using LFWD is a non-destructive technique for
a quick assessment of the field compaction quality. In DPLT, a rigid
circular loading plate of radius $0.15$ m is placed on the soil surface
and subjected to an impulse load generated by the falling weight from a
specified height onto the plate. Subsequently, the induced soil
movements are recorded and the dynamic resilience modulus of the tested
material is computed by some empirical relations. A complete description
of the test can be found elsewhere [@Adam2009; @Tawfik2017].

![ Geometry, boundary conditions and spatial mesh adopted for simulating
DPLT using v-ST/FEM. ](figures/ch3-fig-28){#fig:ch3-fig-28 width="100%"}

In the present study, DPLT is simulated by a two-dimensional
axisymmetric v-ST/FEM model, where the center of the loading plate is
positioned along the axis of symmetry. The geometry, boundary
conditions, and spatial mesh of the finite element model are depicted in
Fig. [28](#fig:ch3-fig-28){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-28"}. There are $5201$ linear triangular elements
(Tria3) and $2688$ nodes present in the spatial mesh. The impulse load
due to the falling weight is modeled by using an equivalent uniform
vertical stress pulse of amplitude $100$ kPa and a time duration of $20$
ms [@Adam2009]. The stress pulse $h(t)$ acting on the loading plate is
defined by a half sine wave as:
$$h(t)=-10^{5}\sin(50\pi t)\,\text{N/m}{}^{2}$$

The total simulation time $T$ is set to $30$ ms, and the linear time
elements of size $\Delta t=1$ ms have been adopted for discretizing the
time domain. Subsequently, the results computed by the proposed method
are compared with the two DPLT studies available in the literature. The
first study is denoted as S1 where the in-situ LFWD test was conducted
by @Tawfik2017, and the second study is denoted by S2 in which the
numerical investigation was conducted by @Adam2009 using the Boundary
Element Method (BEM). In these studies (i.e., S1 and S2), the soils have
different values for Young's modulus $E$ and common values for Poisson's
ratio $\nu$ and mass density $\rho$, as shown in Table
[3](#tab:ch3-tab-3){reference-type="ref" reference="tab:ch3-tab-3"}.

::: {#tab:ch3-tab-3}
  Elastic parameters              Method         $d_{max}$     $p_{max}$
  ------------------------ -------------------- ----------- ------------
  \[6pt\] $E=65$ Mpa             v-ST/FEM        $0.33$ mm    $90.0$ kPa
  $\nu=0.212$               In-situ study (S1)   $0.35$ mm     $100$ kPa
  $\rho=2000$ $kg/m^{3}$                                    
  \[6pt\] $E=32$ Mpa             v-ST/FEM        $0.67$ mm    $90.0$ kPa
  $\nu=0.212$                 BEM study (S2)     $0.65$ mm    $93.1$ kPa
  $\rho=2000$ $kg/m^{3}$                                    
  \[6pt\]                                                   

  :  List of elastic material parameters, and the results of maximum
  plate deflection and maximum soil-plate normal contact stress obtained
  by different schemes.
:::

The results of the time histories of the vertical displacement and the
velocity of the loading plate, and the soil-plate contact stress are
plotted in Fig. [29](#fig:ch3-fig-29){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ch3-fig-29"}. The maximum deflection of the plate
$d_{max}$ obtained by v-ST/FEM is about $0.33$ mm and $0.67$ mm
corresponding to the material parameters used in the studies S1 and S2,
respectively. From Table [3](#tab:ch3-tab-3){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:ch3-tab-3"}, it is evident that these computed values for
$d_{max}$ are in good agreement with those reported in studies S1 and
S2. In the present study, the maximum soil-plate normal contact stress
$p_{max}$ is about $90$ kPa; which lower than the values reported in
studies S1 and S2 (see Table [3](#tab:ch3-tab-3){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:ch3-tab-3"}). This may be due to the use of linear
triangular elements and the absence of the soil-plate interface elements
in the present formulation. Furthermore, the maximum deflection of the
plate occurs at time $t_{d}=11$ ms, and the maximum contact stress
$p_{max}$ occurs at time $t_{p}=10$ ms. The displacement contours at
these time steps are depicted in Fig.
[30](#fig:ch3-fig-30){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:ch3-fig-30"},
where displacements are normalized with respect to the maximum
deflection of the plate.

![ Temporal variation of the vertical displacement of plate (top-left),
the vertical velocity of plate (top-right), and soil-plate contact
stress (bottom-left), and variation of normal contact stress with the
plate displacement (bottom-right) obtained by v-ST/FEM.
](figures/ch3-fig-29){#fig:ch3-fig-29 width="100%"}

![ Normalized contours of the vertical displacements computed by
v-ST/FEM at various time-steps. ](figures/ch3-fig-30){#fig:ch3-fig-30
width="100%"}

# Summary {#sec:ch3-sec8}

In this chapter, the concept of time-discontinuous Galerkin (TDG) method
is presented. The details of single-field and two-field TDG schemes,
such as stability, the order of accuracy, and algorithmic damping, are
discussed. Subsequently, a velocity-based single-field TDG space-time
finite element method has been been developed for elastodynamics
problems. The main characteristics of this method is summarized below.

1.  In v-ST/FEM velocity is the primary unknown which is discontinuous
    in time and continuous in space. The time-continuity of the velocity
    field is satisfied in a weak sense.

2.  The displacement field is obtained by time-integration of the
    velocity field in a post-processing step. These displacement field
    are then used to compute stress-field. Both stress and displacement
    field remain continuous in time.

3.  The advantage of v-ST/FEM is that it involves less number of
    unknowns--unlike other ST/FEM-- which makes v-ST/FEM applicable to
    the large-scale practical problems at relatively low computational
    cost.

4.  It is demonstrated that the present method is unconditionally stable
    and third-order accurate in time for linear interpolation of
    velocity in time.

5.  The numerical dissipation (amplitude decay) and dispersion
    (phase-delay) of v-ST/FEM is smaller than the two-field ST/FEM and
    semi-discrete algorithms.

6.  In the case of a shock problem, the performance of v-ST/FEM was
    found to be superior to HHT-$\alpha$ and Newmark-beta method.
    v-ST/FEM is able to remove the spurious oscillations unlike
    HHT-$\alpha$ and Newmark-beta algorithms.

7.  The numerical characteristics of the v-ST/FEM scheme, therefore,
    make it highly suitable for computing the response of bodies
    subjected to dynamic loading conditions, such as fast-moving loads,
    impulsive loading, long-duration seismic loading, among others.

8.  It is shown that the proposed scheme is non-dissipative in
    high-frequency regime, and can attenuate only the middle band of
    frequencies. Therefore, the only drawback to the present methodology
    is that it does not include a parameter to control the numerical
    dissipation of the high-frequencies.

[^1]: Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-1\]](#eq:ch3-eq-1){reference-type="eqref"
    reference="eq:ch3-eq-1"} characterizes the modal equations of a
    linear parabolic partial differential equation (e.g., heat diffusion
    equation)

[^2]: The boundary of a one-dimensional finite element comprises
    end-points only.

[^3]: Informally speaking, the purpose of introducing the representative
    value $u^{*}$ in TDG/FEM is to facilitate the weak enforcement of
    the initial condition in the time domain. Further, $u^{*}$ connects
    the adjacent time-slabs by transferring the information about the
    solution from one time-slab to another time-slab. In TDG/FEM, this
    so-called connection between the time-slabs is weakly enforced which
    in turn allows the computation to be performed locally in an
    individual time-slab.

[^4]: The internal nodes may be located at specific locations in $I_{n}$
    which are determined from the zeros of the orthonormal polynomials
    like the Jacobi polynomials. This approach can be used for
    developing the high-order time accurate spectral finite element
    schemes [@Hesthaven2007 see].

[^5]: Homogeneous form of Eq.
    [\[eq:ch3-eq-1\]](#eq:ch3-eq-1){reference-type="eqref"
    reference="eq:ch3-eq-1"} is obtained by setting $f=0$, i.e.,
    $$\frac{{du}}{{dt}}+\lambda u=0\quad t\in\left[{0,T}\right],u(0)=u_{0}$$

[^6]: Lax equivalence theorem may be stated as *consistency and
    stability of an algorithm are the necessary and sufficient
    conditions for the convergence of an algorithm.*

[^7]: Henceforth uv-TDG/FEM will be used to denote the two-field TDG/FEM

[^8]: To prove that total energy of the spring-mass system is constant,
    multiply Eq.
    [\[eq:ch3-eq-93\]](#eq:ch3-eq-93){reference-type="eqref"
    reference="eq:ch3-eq-93"} with velocity $v=\frac{du}{dt}$,
    $$v\frac{{dv}}{{dt}}+\omega_{n}^{2}u\frac{{du}}{{dt}}=0$$ then
    $$\frac{d}{{dt}}\left({\frac{1}{2}{v^{2}}}\right)+\frac{d}{{dt}}\left({\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}{u^{2}}}\right)=0$$
    or
    $$\frac{d}{{dt}}\left({\frac{1}{2}{v^{2}}+\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}{u^{2}}}\right)=0$$
    therefore,
    $$\frac{1}{2}{v^{2}}+\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n}^{2}{u^{2}}={\text{constant}}$$

[^9]: Normalized total energy at any time $t$ is defined by total energy
    at time $t$ divided by initial total energy, i.e., $$$$ = $$$$

[^10]: The term *semi-discrete algorithms* is used for collectively
    referencing the second order accurate implicit time-stepping
    algorithms viz., the trapezoidal rule (Newmark method with
    $\gamma=0.5$ and $\beta=0.25$), the Wilson-$\theta$ method with
    $\theta=1.4$ @Bathe1976, the HHT-$\alpha$ method with $\alpha=-0.3$
    @Hilber1977, and Houbolt's method @Houbolt1950. For details about
    these semi-discrete algorithms see @Hughes1983 [@Hughes2012].

[^11]: Eq. [\[eq:ch3-eq-93\]](#eq:ch3-eq-93){reference-type="eqref"
    reference="eq:ch3-eq-93"} is given by following
    $$\frac{d^{2}u}{dt^{2}}+\omega_{n}^{2}=0$$
