# Dynamic SSI of Dam-Reservoir System {#sec-dynamic-ssi-dam-reservoir-system}

The stability of dams during an event of earthquake is critical as failure of such a structure may have catastrophic effects on life and property. When a dam-reservoir-soil system is subjected to the earthquake-motion the hydrodynamic effects induced by the impounded water may intensify the dynamic response of the dam. In addition, the dynamic stresses in the dam depend on the dynamic coupling between the dam, the water in reservoir, and the underlying soil. It is therefore necessary to develop the numerical methods for evaluating the adequacy of a given dam-design against a particular ground motion. Seismic analysis of a dam-reservoir system can be viewed as a problem of dynamic fluid-structure interaction; the ground motion and the deformations of the upstream face of a dam will generate hydrodynamic pressure in the reservoir, and the structure deformations in turn will be affected by the distribution of hydrodynamic pressures at the upstream face. Therefore, the estimation of precise hydrodynamic forces on upstream face of the dam due to earthquakes is one of the key aspects of the analysis and design of dams. In 1933, prof. H.M. Westergaard firstly proposed a standard procedure to take into account the hydrodynamic effects on gravity dam subjected to the earthquake loading. In literature this procedure is well known as *Westergaard's added-mass* approach. [@Westergaard1933] made following assumptions in order to derive an expression for the hydrodynamic pressure exerted on upstream face of the dam.

1. Dam was idealized as two-dimensional rigid structure with vertical upstream face.
2. Water in the reservoir is incompressible, and reservoir extends to infinity in the upstream direction.
3. The amplitudes of displacements of fluid particles are small.
4. The existence of surface waves at free surface of reservoir was ignored.
5. Only horizontal ground motion in the direction perpendicular to the vertical upstream face was considered.

Under aforementioned assumptions, Prof. Westergaard posed the initial-boundary value problem, and obtained pressure solutions at upstream face of the dam. For the purpose of practical engineering use, he approximated the hydrodynamic pressure distribution at upstream face of the dam by a parabola. He observed that the hydrodynamic pressure was same as if a certain body of fluid was firmly attached to the upstream face of dam and forced to move back and forth with the dam while the remainder of the reservoir is left in active. The amount of water included was determined by equating the inertia forces of this body of water to the pressure that actually were exerted upon the faces of the dam under the same motion of the dam. Accordingly, he suggested that the hydrodynamic pressure at face of the dam could be expressed as:

$$
p\left( {y,t} \right) = \frac{7}{8}\rho {a_g}\left( t \right)\sqrt {{H^f}\left( {{H^f} - y} \right)}
$$

where $y$ is vertical distance from the base of the dam, $a_{g}$ is the horizontal ground-acceleration, $H^{f}$ is the height of the reservoir, $t$ is time, and $p(z,t)$ is the hydrodynamic pressure at height $y$ from base of the dam applied normally to the face of the dam.

Above equation indicates that the hydrodynamic pressure is equivalent to the inertia force of a prismatic body of water of unit cross-section area and length $\frac{7}{8}\sqrt {{H^f}\left( {{H^f} - y} \right)}$ attached firmly to face of the dam, and moving with dam back and forth (with total acceleration $a_{g}$) in the direction normal to the face of the dam without friction. This body of the dam (*added-mass*) is confined in a volume bounded by a two-dimensional parabolic surface on the upstream side of the dam. Although the case prof. Westergaard studied was limited to rigid dams with vertical upstream face, and infinitely long reservoir, ignoring surface waves and considering only small displacements of fluid particles, this work was regarded as a milestone. Especially, the concept of added-mass, which he introduced for incompressible water reservoir, greatly simplified the analysis procedure of the response of dam considering the hydrodynamic effects during earthquakes.

In the same year, von [@Von1933] obtained the expression for hydrodynamic pressure force and total load on a rigid dam with a vertical upstream face by using the principle of conservation of linear momentum. These results were very close to the Westergaard results. [@Kotsubo1957; @Chopra1967; @Victoria1969] performed comprehensive analysis of hydrodynamic pressures on the vertical upstream face of a rigid dam due to horizontal as well as vertical components of ground-acceleration. [@Chopra1967] showed that significant errors are introduced by ignoring the compressibility of water, and hydrodynamic forces due to vertical component of ground motion are much larger than those due to horizontal ground motion when the height of water in reservoir is small, however, these forces become comparable as the height of water increases. [@Victoria1969] found that hydrodynamic pressure due to vertical ground motion are strongly influenced by the direction of approach and the velocity of propagation of the earthquake.

[@Chopra1968; @Chopra1970] studied the hydrodynamic interaction between a reservoir and a linear elastic dam with vertical upstream face due to horizontal ground motion. The dynamic response of the dam was approximated by its deformations in the fundamental mode. It was found that the interaction effects have considerable influence on the behavior of dam-reservoir system; the resonant period as well as earthquake response is significantly influenced by hydrodynamic interaction and compressibility of water. In addition, it was demonstrated that the compressibility of water can be ignored if the dam is flexible enough compared to the reservoir.

Further, the analysis of hydrodynamic pressure on the dam due to the vertical component of ground motion demands the modeling of reservoir bed. The simplest assumption is to treat the reservoir bottom as a rigid foundation, which leads to the perfect reflection of pressure waves at the reservoir bottom, and spatially uniform ground-acceleration. However, this assumption may result in unrealistically large hydrodynamic pressure at the upstream face of the dam because the reservoir-bottom condition does not allow energy dissipation in the reservoir domain. The excessive hydrodynamic pressure at vertical upstream face will cause large deformations in the dam which in turn will influence the hydrodynamic response of reservoir.

[@Chakrabarti1973a] investigated the hydrodynamic pressure and structural response of concrete gravity dam with vertical upstream face, including the dam-reservoir interaction, due to vertical component of earthquake ground motion. The response of the dam was approximated by the deformation in the fundamental mode of vibration, and the effect of flexibility of reservoir bottom was included in the analysis. It was showed the structural response to the vertical component of ground motion is significant in the presence of reservoir. This is obvious as the vertical movement of ground may increase the hydrodynamic pressure acting perpendicular to the dam face, which in turn may cause the additional deformation in the dam. The response was especially significant for low height dams in which case the response to vertical component of ground motion can be larger than the response to horizontal component of a ground motion.

[@Chakrabarti1973b] presented a general procedure for analysis of the response of gravity dams with vertical upstream face, including the hydrodynamic interaction and compressibility of water, to both horizontal and vertical components of ground motion. Their approach is based on a substructure coupling technique in which the dam and the fluid domain are treated as separate substructure, and displacements of the dam are represented as a linear combination of the first few modes of vibration of the dam with the reservoir empty and rigid foundation.

[@ChwangHousner1978] used von Karman's *momentum-balance* approach and Westergaard *added-mass* approach to obtain analytical solution for the hydrodynamic pressure distribution along the inclined upstream face of a rigid-dam which subjected to horizontal ground-motion. In this study they found that at any fixed point on the upstream face of dam the pressure decreases as the inclination angle (of the face of dam) decreases. However, for fixed values of inclination angle between $0$ and $90 \, {}^{\circ}$, the maximum hydrodynamic pressure occurs at the base of the dam. Further, [@Chwang1978] employed the two-dimensional potential-flow theory to obtain the exact intergral solution of the problem considered in [@ChwangHousner1978]. It was observed that for any fixed angle of inclination of upstream face of the dam the momentum-method [@ChwangHousner1978] (approximate theory) indicates that the maximum pressure occurs at the base of the dam, whereas the exact theory [@Chwang1978] gives the maximum pressure at some distance above the base of the dam. However, in case of vertical upstream face of the dam both approximate theory and exact theory predicts maximum pressure at the base of the dam.

[@Hall1982] investigated the effects of dam-fluid interaction, water compressibility, fluid-foundation interaction, reservoir shape, and extent of vertical ground motion on the dynamic response of concrete gravity dam. Fluid-foundation interaction was approximately simulated by means of an absorbing boundary condition applied at the bottom of the reservoir, while the foundation was assumed to be rigid. They reported that if the water in the reservoir is assumed as incompressible then the hydrodynamic effects are equivalent to an added mass and added load which reduce the resonant frequencies of the system and change the resonant amplitudes. In this case the dam accelerations with full reservoir are essentially independent of reservoir shape. Further, in the case where water compressibility is considered and fluid-foundation interaction is neglected the dam accelerations strongly depend on the reservoir shape. The net effect of fluid-foundation interaction is to reduce the response of dam, and the resultant dam accelerations depend much less on reservoir shape, especially for horizontal ground motion.

The reservoir bottom (or the top of bedrock foundation) in upstream direction may consist a deposition of a sediment layer of considerable depth. The effect of sedimentary layers is to partially absorb the incident hydrodynamic pressure waves and facilitate the energy dissipation in the reservoir domain. [@Fenves1983] studied the effect of reservoir bottom absorption on the hydrodynamic pressure in reservoir and the dynamic response of concrete gravity dams. Reservoir bottom absorption effect was modeled by means of an absorbing boundary condition applied at the bottom of reservoir allowing the partial absorption of hydrodynamic pressure waves at the reservoir bottom. The foundation underneath the dam-reservoir system was assumed to be rigid. It was concluded that the reservoir bottom absorption-effect can significantly reduce the resonant response of gravity dams to both horizontal and vertical ground motion components. This reduction in response becomes more substantial as stiffness of the dam increases. The decrease in resonant frequency of the dam due to dam-water interaction is less pronounced for a wave absorptive reservoir bottom than for a rigid reservoir bottom. The assumption of water incompressibility overestimates both resonant response and response to high excitation frequencies due to horizontal ground motion, in addition, this assumption also underestimate the importance of the response to the vertical ground motion.

[@Cheng1986] modeled the reservoir bottom as a poroelastic sediment layer of finite extent situated on top of an elastic half-space. It was showed that in case of saturated pore water the interaction between the sediment and the reservoir is negligible. Even a thin sediment layer, however, can significantly modify the reservoir response if the pore water is slightly desaturated. It was found that the resonance frequency of the system decreases and amplitude increases as the water compressibility increases. Further, it was observed that in case of highly permeable, partially saturated, and stiff sediment layer the hydrodynamic force on the rigid dam decreases significantly.

[@Chopra1981] presented a general procedure for analysis of the dynamic response of the dam-reservoir-soil (DRS) system to the horizontal and vertical components of earthquake motions. The method was based on a substructure coupling technique in which the DRS system was divided into three substructures; the dam, the reservoir with infinite length in upstream direction, and the semi-infinite viscoelastic soil domain. The displacements of the dam were expressed as a linear combination of Ritz vectors, which are selected as normal modes of an associated undamped dam-soil system.

[@Lotfi1987] developed a finite element procedure for the problems of dynamic interaction of dam-reservoir-soil systems. They devised a technique based on the interface elements (called the hyper-elements) for rigorous modeling of all interactions, such as reservoir-soil interaction, reservoir-dam, and dam-soil interaction. In this study they concluded that the wave reflection approach presented in [@Hall1982; @Fenves1983] to model the reservoir bottom absorption effect underestimate the response of the dam. [@Medina1990] rigorously model the reservoir-foundation interaction in their method of analysis, which was based on boundary element method, and found that, although the Chopra's scheme to model the sediment layer [@Hall1982; @Fenves1983] was capable of providing a reasonably accurate prediction of the response to a vertical excitation, it underestimated the peak value of crest acceleration caused by harmonic horizontal excitation. [@Hatami1997] modified the wave reflection approach presented by the Chopra and coworkers to model the reservoir bottom absorption effects in the seismic analysis of the gravity dam. Hatami's model explicitly accounts for the thickness as well as the effects of wave attenuation in the sediment layer and reflection of waves from the underlying foundation rock. In addition, Hatami's model also utilizes the mechanical parameters of the sediment layer and the foundation rock. Unfortunately, the model is only applicable when the analysis is performed in frequency domain.

In the finite element analysis of dynamic dam-reservoir interaction problems, difficulties arise mainly because of the large extent of the fluid domain, where fluid is practically unbounded. The infinite reservoir domain is usually truncated by placing the artificial boundaries in the upstream direction at some distance from the dam. In the finite representation of such domains, a proper boundary condition must be applied at the artificial boundary to represent the effects of radiation damping. [@Saini1978] developed the special finite elements extending to infinity to model the large extent of reservoir. These infinite elements naturally satisfies the Sommerfeld radiation condition at the infinity. Their method of analysis was based on the substructure coupling technique in which the reservoir and the dam were handled as two substructures. The dam was discretized by using standard finite elements, which were coupled with the infinite fluid elements. This technique depend upon the frequency of vibration and, therefore, unsuitable for a time domain analysis. [@Sharan1987] proposed a simple boundary condition to model the effects of radiation damping in the analysis of hydrodynamic pressures. It was also showed that the Sommerfeld boundary condition at the truncated upstream boundary of reservoir does not truly represent the effect of radiation damping, particularly when the excitation frequency is less than the second natural frequency of the reservoir. The use of the Sommerfeld boundary condition, therefore, requires large extent of the fluid domain to be considered in the analysis. From the numerical experiments he showed that the modified damping condition is advantageous as absorbing boundary can be placed at relatively short distance from the dam as compared to distance required in case of the Sommerfeld damping condition. [@Yang1993; @Maity1999] proposed the explicit time-domain transmitting boundary condition for the analysis of dam-reservoir interactions. These boundary conditions are more accurate than Sharan's boundary conditions, however, their finite element implementation is relatively tedious. Recently, researchers [@Basu2004; @Prempramote2009; @Birk2012; @Lin2012; @Samii2012] have developed sophisticated procedures to model the dam-reservoir interaction problems.

Various computational techniques have been proposed in the literature to model the coupling phenomenon in dam-reservoir interaction problem. The simplest procedure being adopted is that both fluid and solid domain are coupled and solved as a one system. [@Zienkiewicz1969; @Muller1981] used pressure as the unknown in the fluid and displacements in the solid, but the resultant equations lead to unsymmetrical matrices. [@Olson1985] used velocity potential and a hydrostatic pressure as unknown in each fluid region, and used displacements as unknown in the solid. The use of pressure as unknown in fluid and displacement in solid results in unsymmetrical matrices. [@Sandberg1988] obtained a symmetrical system by using pressure and a displacement potential to describe the fluid domain. Their formulation allows the use of different nodal interpolation for pressure and displacement potential. Further, number of unknowns can be reduced by employing static condensation to the pressure field. [@Belytschko1976; @Bathe1979; @Wilson1983; @Chen1990; @Pelecanos2013] used displacements as the nodal variable in both the solid and fluid domain. However, these formulations suffer from the presence of spurious zero-energy modes unless an irrotational constraint with/without reduced integration scheme is taken into account. [@Bermudez1995] also used displacement variables for both fluid and the solid domain. But they employed linear elements for the solid domain and nonconforming Raviart-Thomas elements of lower order for the fluid domain to eliminate the zero-energy modes. The advantage of the displacement-based formulation is that the fluid elements can easily be coupled to the structural elements using standard finite element assembly procedures. But the degrees of freedom for the fluid domain increase significantly.

The coupled modeled of dam-reservoir interaction problems may be achieved using the substructure techniques, in which different domains are modeled as separate computational entities amongst which interaction effects are communicated. [@Ghaemian1998] presented two unconditionally stable staggered coupling schemes, in time domain, for the dam-reservoir interaction problem. The fist scheme was based on approximation of the displacement from the equation of motion in the solid domain. The second scheme was based on approximation of the pressure from the governing equation of fluid-domain. [@Maity2003] suggested an iterative scheme in connection with the staggered solution procedure for the dam-reservoir interaction problem. More details regarding the iterative coupling techniques for dam-reservoir interaction problem can be found in literature [@Park1980; @Park1983; @Felippa1988; @Felippa2001; @Jahromi2009; @Soares2014].

The objective of this chapter is to compute the seismic response of the dam-reservoir (DR) and dam-reservoir-soil (DRS) system while considering all types of dynamic interaction. The layout of this chapter is as follows. In Section [2](#sec:ch6_sec2){reference-type="ref" reference="sec:ch6_sec2"} governing equations for DR and DRS system are presented. Viscous boundary conditions, which contains the contribution of free-field response of DR and DRS system, are applied at the artificial boundaries of computation domain. In Section [3](#sec:ch6_sec3){reference-type="ref" reference="sec:ch6_sec3"}, computation details related to the free-field response of DR and DRS system are discussed. Section [4](#sec:ch6_sec4){reference-type="ref" reference="sec:ch6_sec4"} presents the v-ST/FEM weak form for the DR and DRS system. The space-time finite element discretization of the weak form and computer implementation of v-ST/FEM formulation are given in Section [5](#sec:ch6_sec5){reference-type="ref" reference="sec:ch6_sec5"} and Section [6](#sec:ch6_sec6){reference-type="ref" reference="sec:ch6_sec6"}, respectively. In later section, a block-iterative scheme is devised to solve the coupled equations of fluid and solid domain. InSection [7](#sec:ch6_sec7){reference-type="ref" reference="sec:ch6_sec7"}, various dam-reservoir interaction problems are solved to demonstrate the performance of the present approach. Lastly, for the verification of the proposed scheme, results obtained by using v-ST/FEM are compared with the results available in literature.
