# Elastic waves {#sec-elastic-waves-introduction}

In many fields of both engineering and physics the problems ranging from simulation of earthquake ground motion [@Bao1998; @Bielak2003] and dynamic soil-structure interaction [@Wolf1985; @Wolf1988], to electromagnetic waves [@Chew1995], and quantum mechanics [@Alonso2003] may be best represented or modeled by considering the linear wave propagation on infinite or semi-infinite unbounded domain. Such modeling is especially of interest in the design of earth-structures such as dam, tunnels, embankments, hospital and residential buildings etc. against the transient loading and vibrations caused by the high-speed trains, road-traffic, underground explosions, and more importantly earthquake motion. In these problems the finite dimensional structure dynamically interacts with the adjacent unbounded soil domain, and therefore the two domains mutually influence the dynamic responses of each other [@Wolf1996; @Burman2012].

For the computation of the dynamic SSI problems, a surface called *interaction horizon*  [@Wolf1996] that encloses the structure and forms the boundary of the computational domain has to be selected. The objective of these domain reduction techniques is twofold; decreasing the computation burden by reducing the size of the problem and enforcing the so called radiation condition thus prohibiting any spurious reflections at the artificial truncated boundaries (ATB). In this way, ATB simulate the effects of the far field on the dynamic response of both the structure and the near field.

The structure of the chapter is as follows. In section 2 of this chapter basic theory of wave propagation in elastic solids is given. Section 3 of this chapter reviews some of the most popular boundary conditions for solving wave propagation problems in unbounded domains. Section 4 of this chapter provides the derivation of viscous boundary condition first proposed by [@Lysmer1969] and discusses its characteristics. Subsequently, in section 5 of this chapter, viscous boundary conditions are modified to allow seismic excitation to enter the computational domain.

Linear and nonlinear dynamic response of the deformable media can be described by a wave propagation phenomenon. A deformable media subjected to a transient loading condition produces mechanical waves; as elements of the medium are deformed the disturbance is transmitted from one point in space to the next. The local mechanical disturbances of a medium is not instantaneously detected at positions that are at a distance from the region of excitation. It takes time for a disturbance to propagate from its source to other positions. In this way as the disturbance propagates through the medium it carries along amounts of energy due to motions of particles of medium about their equilibrium position.

Further, the transmission of mechanical wave depends mainly upon the deformation characteristics and inertia of the medium. As it will be seen later both stiffness and inertia of a medium tend decrease the wave speed. A rigid medium, (e.g. rocks with very high stiffness) deforms insignificantly and the mechanical disturbance travels almost instantaneously in it. Similarly, a hypothetical massless medium (i.e. no inertia) allows mechanical wave to travel without any delay. These concepts have been used widely to model the interaction between the soil/rock foundation and the earth structures such as concrete gravity dams. It is important to note that the inertia of a system first offers resistance to motion, but once the medium is in motion inertia with the resilience of the medium tends to sustain the motion [@Achenbach1973a].
