# Introduction

Mathematical (analytical or numerical) modeling of continuum mechanics
problems is an integral part of engineering design, scientific research,
and technological inventions. For example, in the field of geotechnical
engineering, numerical methods are indispensable tool for designing and
health monitoring of ground and soil-structures, such as embankments,
bridges and pile foundations, and tunnels subjected to static and
dynamic loading conditions. In recent years, techniques have been
developed for handling the issues related to the erosion of soil
structures, piping flows within natural slopes, and the stability of
embankments subjected to tidal waves. Further, environmental impact and
safety assessments of the ground vibrations generated by high-speed
trains [@Ditzel2001; @Krylov1996; @Takemiya2003] and road traffic
[@Chua1992; @Clemente1998; @Clouteau2001; @Maeda1998] close to the
residential areas, hospitals, and high-tech industries are of paramount
importance.

The finite element method is one of the most popular numerical methods
for computing accurate solutions to partial differential equations
(PDEs) that describe many engineering problems. The FEM originated from
the structural mechanics discipline and has since been extended to other
areas of solid mechanics as well as heat transfer, fluid dynamics, and
electromagnetism. In dealing with PDEs, it is useful to differentiate
between several types; elliptic, hyperbolic, and parabolic PDEs. For
example, elliptic PDEs generally represent static problems in which only
boundary conditions (viz., Dirichlet boundary condition and/or Neumann
boundary condition) need to be prescribed. Hyperbolic and parabolic
PDEs, on the other hand, represent a transient problem and require
specification of both intial and boundary conditions. Clearly, both the
theoretical and numerical treatment differ considerably for these three
types of PDEs.

The most extending approach for solving a transient problem is based on
a classical semi-discretized FEM formulation. In this approach, usually
a generalized Galekin methods are first employed to construct the
weak-form of governing PDEs. Such weak-forms are constructed in the
spatial domain while assuming that the shape functions are independent
of time. Furthermore, spatial nodal values of the trial functions only
depend upon the time while nodal values of the test functions remain
independent of the time. The time-independece of the shape functions and
time-dependence of nodal values of the solution create an uncoupled
space-time domain. Consequently, one obtains a system of ordinary
differential equations in time. Time-marching schemes based on the
finite difference methods are then used to solve the resultant system of
ODEs. In this way, the semi-discrete FEM treats the problem differently
in the space and time domain; variation principles are used for the
former domain, and finite difference techniques are used for latter
domain. Further, it is well established that the finite differnce
methods produce less accurate solutions than FEM. Therefore,careful
selection of a finite difference scheme is required to achieve the
desired level of accuracy. Here, let us mentioned that a poor selection
of FDM may limit the overall accuracy of the semi-discrete FEM, or in
some cases may even produce inconsistent results. Lastly, selection of
the appropriate FDM mainly depend upon the type of problem, for example,
the algorithms which works well for the heat-diffusion problem may not
be suitable for the problem of elastodynamics.

In transient problems, one wishes to use a high-order accurate time
integration scheme with a large time-step size in an attempt to reduce
the computation cost. However, the use of large time-step size is only
possible if the time-marching scheme is unconditionally stable; the
stability of the time integration algorithm does not depend upon the
time-step size. Unconditionally stable methods, such as the Newmark-beta
method [@Newmark1959], the HHT--$\alpha$ method [@Hilber1977], the
Houbolt method [@Houbolt1950], and the Wilson--$\theta$ method
[@Bathe1976], are the most often used dynamic solvers in semi-discrete
FEM. However, these methods are only second-order accurate. Furthermore,
Dahlquist's theorem says that a single-step unconditionally stable
time-integration algorithm can be at most second-order accurate
[@Dahlquist1963]. High-order accurate time-integration schemes based on
the finite difference schemes can be employed. However, these schemes
are generally conditionally stable and require very small time steps for
stability [@Hughes1983]. The requirement of small time steps increases
the overall computational cost of large-scale simulations. Therefore,
there is still a need for dynamic solvers which are high-order accurate
and unconditionally stable, such that large time steps can be used to
reduce the computational cost while maintaining the accuracy of the
solutions.

At present, time-discontinuous Galerkin approach have been well studied
for the problems involving first order time derivatives. In the field of
computational fluid dynamics, this approach have been used for problems
involving the moving and free boundaries [@Bazilevs2013]. In TDG/ST/FEM,
shape-functions are usually defined on the space-time domain. The weak
form of the govering equations are formulated in a space-time slab,
therefore, no additional time-marching schemes are required. Therefore,
such method may provide a unified framework for using the Lagrangian
mesh, Eulerian mesh, and arbitrary moving mesh. In addition, for
problems involving the second-order time derivatives TDG/ST/FEM
facilitates the weak-enforcement of initial conditions through
jump-discontinuity in time. In this way, TDG/ST/FEM provides a general
framework for arbitrary high order accurate, unconditionally stable time
integration algorithms. We believe that these characteristics of
TDG/ST/FEM may have great potential for solving the problems of
large-deformation dynamic problems.

The objective of this thesis is to develope an efficient space-time
finite element method within time-discontinuous Galerkin framework. In
this context, a velocity-based single-field ST/FEM is developed.
Hereafter, the term v-ST/FEM will be used to denote the proposed method.
In v-ST/FEM, velocity is the primary unknowns which is discontinuous in
time and continuous in space. The displacement field is obtained by time
integration of the velocity field in a post-processing step. The main
advantage of v-ST/FEM is that it involves less number of
unknowns--unlike other ST/FEM--which makes v-ST/FEM applicable to the
large-scale practical problems at relatively low computation cost. In
addition, the proposed scheme naturally allows the coupling of
space-time domain, consequently, it can be used with Lagrangian mesh,
Eulerian mesh, or arbitrary moving mesh framework. We believe that the
proposed method can be developed further as an effective tool for
simulating problems with moving and free boundaries.

This thesis includes the following chapters:

In **Chapter [\[ch:ch3\]](#ch:ch3){reference-type="ref"
reference="ch:ch3"}**, the working principles of the time-discontinuous
Galerkin finite element method (TDG/FEM) are described by using a first
order ordinary differential equation (ODE) and a second order ODE.
Subsequently, a velocity-based time-discontinuous space-time finite
element method (v-ST/FEM) for a multidimensional elastodynamics problem
is developed. Several numerical tests are performed to demonstrate the
efficiency and the applicability of the v-ST/FEM.

In **Chapter [\[ch:ch4\]](#ch:ch4){reference-type="ref"
reference="ch:ch4"}**, a concise presentation regarding the theory of
wave propagation in an elastic solid is given. After briefly discussing
the reflection and refraction of a plane harmonic waves it is shown that
the problem of dynamic soil-structure interaction (SSI) can be viewed as
a wave-scattering phenomenon, in which the free-field response of an
elastic half-space is perturbed by the existing structure. The chapter
presents some of the most popular boundary conditions for solving wave
propagation problems in the unbounded domain. In addition, the viscous
boundary conditions and modified viscous boundary conditions are
derived.

In **Chapter [\[ch:ch5\]](#ch:ch5){reference-type="ref"
reference="ch:ch5"}**, v-ST/FEM method is used to solve the problem of
dynamic soil-structure interaction. In this context, finite element
modeling of the unbounded soil domain is performed by placing modified
viscous boundaries at some distance from the existing structure. A
dynamic dam-soil interaction problem is considered to validate the
formulation and computer implementation of v-ST/FEM. The results
obtained by proposed scheme are validated by solving the same problem
using the semi-discrete FEM with classical Newmark-$\beta$ method.
Results obtained by two methods are compared and found to be nearly
identical.

In **Chapter [\[ch:ch6\]](#ch:ch6){reference-type="ref"
reference="ch:ch6"}**, v-ST/FEM is used to compute the seismic response
of the dam-reservoir (DR) and dam-reservoir-soil (DRS) system while
considering all types of dynamic interaction. Both dam and the
underlying soil domain is assumed to be linearly elastic, and material
damping is modeled by Rayleigh damping. The water in the reservoir is
assumed to be inviscid, linearly compressible with a small amplitudes
for the displacements and velocity. Thus, the hydrodynamic pressure in
the reservoir is given by the pressure wave equation. In the finite
element modeling, viscous boundary conditions are used to truncate the
semi-infinite domain of reservoir and underlying soil-domain.

In **Chapter [\[ch:ch7\]](#ch:ch7){reference-type="ref"
reference="ch:ch7"}**, v-ST/FEM is employed for the problems involving
dynamic response of solids and structures with nonlinear stress-strain
relationships. The problem of dynamic interaction between the concrete
gravity dam and reservoir is taken as a model problem, in which a
generalized nonlinear stress-strain relationship is used to describe the
material behavior of concrete in the dam. The foundation underneath the
dam-reservoir (DR) system is assumed to be perfectly rigid. The
governing equations describing the dynamic interaction between dam and
reservoir constitute a system of linear-nonlinear coupled equations, in
which linear equations govern the reservoir domain and nonlinear
equations govern the solid domain. A block-iterative scheme is used to
enforce the coupling between the solid and fluid domain. In each
iteration of v-ST/FEM with the block-iterative scheme, the linearized
equations of the solid domain are first solved to compute the increments
in the velocity field. Subsequently, the total velocities are corrected
and then used for computing the trial values of hydrodynamic pressures
in the reservoir by solving the linear equation for the reservoir
domain. In each iteration of the proposed scheme, therefore, linear
equations for the solid and fluid domain are solved, separately, which
significantly decreases the computation cost.

