# Introduction {#sec-ch3-1}

Numerical methods for computing the dynamic response of the ground and soil-structures, such as embankments, bridges and pile foundations, and tunnels, are an indispensable tool for designing and monitoring ground structures. The Finite Element Method (FEM) has been undoubtedly accepted as the most popular, reliable, and successful numerical tool for simulating soil dynamics problems [@Anandarajah1993; @Khoshnoudian2002; @Kimura2000; @Kuwano1991; @LiandUgai1998; @Murakami2010]. Further, environmental impact and safety assessments of the ground vibrations generated by high-speed trains [@Ditzel2001; @Krylov1996; @Takemiya2003] and road traffic [@Chua1992; @Clemente1998; @Clouteau2001; @Maeda1998] close to the residential areas, hospitals, and high-tech industries are of paramount importance. FEM has also been extensively used for investigating the level of vibrations and schemes to reduce them [@Hung2001; @Ju2007; @Ju2009; @Ju2006; @Ju2004]. Moreover, in the field of transportation engineering, nondestructive deflection testing, with the Falling Weight Deflectometer (FWD), has become increasingly popular for monitoring the structural health of flexible pavement systems over time @Chai2014 [@Elbagalati2018; @Maina2000]. In FWD testing, the recorded time histories of surface deflections are used to back-calculate the moduli of pavement layers by employing parameter-identification techniques [@Goktepe2006]. Recently, FEM has been employed extensively to simulate FWD testing under realistic conditions and to predict the response of pavement systems brought about by impulsive loading [@Loizos2005; @Nazarian1995; @Picoux2009].

In the preceding discussion, the most extended approach for solving elastodynamics problems was based on a semi-discretized FEM formulation. In this approach, FEM is first applied to the spatial domain leading to a system of ordinary differential equations (ODE) in the time domain. Subsequently, direct time integration schemes, based on the finite difference method, are employed to solve the resulting system of ODEs. In general, the errors in the finite element simulations of soil-dynamics problems are partially due to the space-time discretization and to the uncertainties involved in the material constitutive relationship and the material parameters. Numerical errors can be reduced by adopting high-order accurate time solvers within FEM framework. Unconditionally stable methods, such as the Newmark-beta method [@Newmark1959], the HHT-$\alpha$ method [@Hilber1977], the Houbolt method [@Houbolt1950], and the Wilson-$\theta$ method [@Bathe1976], are the most often used dynamic solvers. However, these methods are only second-order accurate. Furthermore, Dahlquist's theorem says that a single-step unconditionally stable time-integration algorithm can be at most second-order accurate [@Dahlquist1963]. High-order accurate time-integration schemes based on finite difference schemes can be employed. However, these schemes are generally conditionally stable and require very small time steps for stability [@Hughes1983]. The requirement of small time steps increases the overall computational cost of large-scale simulations. Therefore, there is still a need for dynamic solvers which are high-order accurate and unconditionally stable, such that large time steps can be used to reduce the computational cost while maintaining the accuracy of the solutions. The aim of this thesis is to devise such a scheme.

To achieve high-order accuracy combined with stability, an alternative strategy called the Space-Time Finite Element Method (ST/FEM) was proposed in the past; it is still being actively researched. The concept of finite elements in the time domain was first exploited independently in @Argyris1969 and @Fried1969 using Hamilton's principle. Unfortunately, these formulations were found to be inconsistent, and even inaccurate in some cases, due to the vanishing variation in the displacement at the end points of the time interval. Soon after, @Bailey1975 [@Bailey1980; @Bailey1982] and @Simkins1981 established that instead of Hamilton's principle, Hamilton's law of varying action, HLVA, should be used as the starting point for the time-finite element formulations, as it includes the initial conditions implicitly. However, for quite some time, researchers misinterpreted the so-called *trailing terms* of HLVA, and believed that both the displacement field and the velocity field should be continuous in time [@Borri1985b]. Due to this misconception, many studies adopted Hermite cubic polynomials as the lowest order of interpolation functions for the displacement field [@Baruch1982; @Baruch1984; @Gellert1978; @Geradin1974; @Howard1978; @Riff1984; @Simkins1981; @Sorek1982]. Later, Borri and his colleagues [@Borri1986; @Borri1985a; @Borri1985b] showed that the need to use Hermite polynomials can be avoided by employing Hamilton's weak principle (HWP) in which approximating functions should ensure the continuity of only the displacement field (i.e., $C0$ continuity in time), and not that of any of its time-derivatives. More recently, unconditionally stable time-finite element formulations have been derived using the two-field form of HWP instead of the primal form [@Aharoni1992; @Borri1990; @Borri1991; @Borri1993; @Mello1990; @Ruge1996]. For a comprehensive overview and recent advances in the time-finite element formulations based on Hamilton's law, readers are referred to @Tamma2011.

Another approach towards development of the ST/FEM is by weighted residual techniques, such as the continuous Galerkin method [@Bajer1995; @Bajer1987], the discontinuous Galerkin method [@Hughes1988], and the Petrov-Galerkin method [@Fung1996; @Fung1999], while working directly with the differential equations rather than a variational principle. Moreover, ST/FEM derived from the time-discontinuous Galerkin (TDG) method led to the unconditionally stable and high-order accurate ODE solvers [@Delfour1981; @Johnson1986; @Lasaint1974]. The discontinuous Galerkin (DG) method was first developed for the neutron-transport equation @Lasaint1974 [@Reed1973]. Soon after, the TDG method was introduced by Jamet [@Bonnerot1979; @Jamet1978] for solving the parabolic differential equation with the time- dependent spatial domain. Almost a decade afterwards, Hughes and Hulbert presented the time-discontinuous Galerkin space-time FEM (TDG/ST/FEM) for the fields of elastodynamics and structural dynamics [@Hughes1988]. In this paper, two general formulations of TDG/ST/FEM were provided: (i) the single-field formulation, in which the displacement field is the primary unknown, and (ii) the two-field formulation, in which both the displacement field and the velocity field are treated as the primary unknowns. In a latter approach, the trial functions for both fields were continuous in space and discontinuous in time, whereas the test functions were continuous in both space and time. In the two-field formulation, the displacement-velocity compatibility condition and the continuity of both unknown fields in time were satisfied in a weak sense by using some inner products. This is the key element allowing for the generalization of TDG/ST/FEM developed for first order hyperbolic equations to the second order hyperbolic equations [@Hughes1988]. However, the main disadvantage of the two-field formulation is that it leads to larger systems of coupled equations than formulations derived from direct integration schemes. To overcome this difficulty, various efficient iterative predictor-multi-corrector algorithms have been suggested by @Li1998 [@Mancuso2003; @Chien2000; @Mancuso2006], among others. Details on the numerical characteristics of two-field formulations, such as stability, the order of accuracy, and algorithmic damping, have been discussed elsewhere [@Fan1997; @Fung1996; @Hulbert1992].

At present, time-discontinuous Galerkin approach have been well studied for the problems involving first order time derivatives. In the field of computational fluid dynamics, this approach have been used for problems involving the moving and free boundaries [@Bazilevs2013]. In TDG/ST/FEM, shape-functions are usually defined on the space-time domain. Therefore, such method may provide a unified framework for using the Lagrangian mesh, Eulerian mesh, and Arbitrary moving mesh. In addition, for problems involving the second-order time derivatives TDG/ST/FEM facilitates the weak-enforcement of initial conditions through jump-discontinuity in time. In this way, TDG/ST/FEM provides a general framework for arbitrary high order accurate, unconditionally stable time integration algorithms. We believe that these characteristics of TDG/ST/FEM may have great potential for solving the problems of large-deformation dynamic problems.

Accordingly, in this chapter, a velocity-based single-field ST/FEM is developed within a TDG framework. Hereafter, the term v-ST/FEM will be used to denote the proposed method. In v-ST/FEM, velocity is the primary unknowns which is discontinuous in time and continuous in space. The displacement field is obtained by time integration of the velocity field in a post-processing step. The advantage of v-ST/FEM is that it involves less number of unknowns--unlike other ST/FEM--which makes v-ST/FEM applicable to the large-scale practical problems at relatively low computation cost.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. First, in @sec-ch3-2, the concept of time-discontinuous Galerkin finite element method (TDG/FEM) is explained for the first order ordinary differential equation (ODE) in time. Subsequently, the numerical properties of the resultant algorithm are discussed. @sec-ch3-3 extends these concepts to a second order ODE in time. In this section, three types of TDG/FEM formulations are presented; uv-TDG/FEM, u-TDG/FEM, and v-TDG/FEM. In uv-TDG/FEM, both displacement and velocity are approximated by using the time discontinuous trial functions, in addition, displacement-velocity compatibility condition is weakly enforced. In u-TDG/FEM, displacement is the primary unknown, and velocity is obtained by taking the time derivative of the displacement. Accordingly, the displacement-velocity relationship is strongly enforced. Lastly, in v-TDG/FEM velocity is the primary unknown, and displacement is obtained in a post-processing step by consistent time integration of the velocity field. Further, in @sec-ch3-4 numerical properties of the TDG/FEM schemes for second order ODE are discussed. The continuum theory of elastodynamics and the initial-boundary value problem (IBVP) are summarized in @sec-ch3-5. @sec-ch3-6 describes the general theoretical development and formulation aspects of the v-ST/FEM approach. In this section the implementation details of the current methodology are also discussed. The applicability and the validity of v-ST/FEM are then demonstrated in @sec-ch3-7 through different numerical examples.


